21.4 The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how B cells mature and how B cell tolerance develops
•
Discuss how B cells are activated and differentiate into plasma cells
•
Describe the structure of the antibody classes and their functions
Antibodies were the first component of the adaptive immune response to be characterized by scientists working on
the immune system. It was already known that individuals who survived a bacterial infection were immune to re-
infection with the same pathogen. Early microbiologists took serum from an immune patient and mixed it with a
fresh culture of the same type of bacteria, then observed the bacteria under a microscope. The bacteria became
clumped in a process called agglutination. When a different bacterial species was used, the agglutination did not
happen. Thus, there was something in the serum of immune individuals that could specifically bind to and
agglutinate bacteria.
Scientists now know the cause of the agglutination is an antibody molecule, also called an immunoglobulin. What is
an antibody? An antibody protein is essentially a secreted form of a B cell receptor. (In fact, surface immunoglobulin
is another name for the B cell receptor.) Not surprisingly, the same genes encode both the secreted antibodies and
the surface immunoglobulins. One minor difference in the way these proteins are synthesized distinguishes a naïve
B cell with antibody on its surface from an antibody-secreting plasma cell with no antibodies on its surface. The
antibodies of the plasma cell have the exact same antigen-binding site and specificity as their B cell precursors.
There are five different classes of antibody found in humans: IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA, and IgE. Each of these has specific
functions in the immune response, so by learning about them, researchers can learn about the great variety of
antibody functions critical to many adaptive immune responses.
B cells do not recognize antigen in the complex fashion of T cells. B cells can recognize native, unprocessed antigen
and do not require the participation of MHC molecules and antigen-presenting cells.

B Cell Differentiation and Activation
B cells differentiate in the bone marrow. During the process of maturation, up to 100 trillion different clones of B
cells are generated, which is similar to the diversity of antigen receptors seen in T cells.
B cell differentiation and the development of tolerance are not quite as well understood as it is in T cells. Central
tolerance is the destruction or inactivation of B cells that recognize self-antigens in the bone marrow, and its role is
critical and well established. In the process of clonal deletion, immature B cells that bind strongly to self-antigens
expressed on tissues are signaled to induce their own destruction by apoptosis, removing them from the population.
In the process of clonal anergy, however, B cells exposed to soluble antigen in the bone marrow are not physically
deleted, but become unable to function.
Another mechanism called peripheral tolerance is a direct result of T cell tolerance. In peripheral tolerance,
functional, mature B cells leave the bone marrow but have yet to be exposed to self-antigen. Most protein antigens
require signals from helper T cells (Th2) to proceed to make antibody. When a B cell binds to a self-antigen but
receives no signals from a nearby Th2 cell to produce antibody, the cell is signaled to undergo apoptosis and is
destroyed. This is yet another example of the control that T cells have over the adaptive immune response.
After B cells are activated by their binding to antigen, they differentiate into plasma cells. Plasma cells often leave
the secondary lymphoid organs, where the response is generated, and migrate back to the bone marrow, where the
whole differentiation process started. After secreting antibodies for a specific period, they die, as most of their
energy is devoted to making antibodies and not to maintaining themselves. Thus, plasma cells are said to be
terminally differentiated.
The final B cell of interest is the memory B cell, which results from the clonal expansion of an activated B cell.
Memory B cells function in a way similar to memory T cells. They lead to a stronger and faster secondary response
when compared to the primary response, as illustrated below.

Antibody Structure
Antibodies are glycoproteins consisting of two types of polypeptide chains with attached carbohydrates. The heavy
chain and the light chain are the two polypeptides that form the antibody. The main differences between the
classes of antibodies are in the differences between their heavy chains, but as you shall see, the light chains have an
important role, forming part of the antigen-binding site on the antibody molecules.

Four-chain Models of Antibody Structures
All antibody molecules have two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains. (Some antibodies contain
multiple units of this four-chain structure.) The Fc region of the antibody is formed by the two heavy chains coming
together, usually linked by disulfide bonds (Figure 21.21). The Fc portion of the antibody is important in that many
effector cells of the immune system have Fc receptors. Cells having these receptors can then bind to antibody-
coated pathogens, greatly increasing the specificity of the effector cells. At the other end of the molecule are two
identical antigen-binding sites.

FIGURE 21.21
Antibody and IgG2 Structures
The typical four chain structure of a generic antibody (a) and the corresponding three-
dimensional structure of the antibody IgG2 (b). (credit b: modification of work by Tim Vickers)

Five Classes of Antibodies and their Functions
In general, antibodies have two basic functions. They can act as the B cell antigen receptor or they can be secreted,
circulate, and bind to a pathogen, often labeling it for identification by other forms of the immune response. Of the
five antibody classes, notice that only two can function as the antigen receptor for naïve B cells: IgM and IgD (Figure
21.22). Mature B cells that leave the bone marrow express both IgM and IgD, but both antibodies have the same
antigen specificity. Only IgM is secreted, however, and no other nonreceptor function for IgD has been discovered.

FIGURE 21.22
Five Classes of Antibodies

IgM consists of five four-chain structures (20 total chains with 10 identical antigen-binding sites) and is thus the
largest of the antibody molecules. IgM is usually the first antibody made during a primary response. Its 10 antigen-
binding sites and large shape allow it to bind well to many bacterial surfaces. It is excellent at binding complement
proteins and activating the complement cascade, consistent with its role in promoting chemotaxis, opsonization,
and cell lysis. Thus, it is a very effective antibody against bacteria at early stages of a primary antibody response. As
the primary response proceeds, the antibody produced in a B cell can change to IgG, IgA, or IgE by the process
known as class switching. Class switching is the change of one antibody class to another. While the class of
antibody changes, the specificity and the antigen-binding sites do not. Thus, the antibodies made are still specific to
the pathogen that stimulated the initial IgM response.
IgG is a major antibody of late primary responses and the main antibody of secondary responses in the blood. This
is because class switching occurs during primary responses. IgG is a monomeric antibody that clears pathogens
from the blood and can activate complement proteins (although not as well as IgM), taking advantage of its
antibacterial activities. Furthermore, this class of antibody is the one that crosses the placenta to protect the
developing fetus from disease exits the blood to the interstitial fluid to fight extracellular pathogens.
IgA exists in two forms, a four-chain monomer in the blood and an eight-chain structure, or dimer, in exocrine gland
secretions of the mucous membranes, including mucus, saliva, and tears. Thus, dimeric IgA is the only antibody to
leave the interior of the body to protect body surfaces. IgA is also of importance to newborns, because this antibody
is present in mother’s breast milk (colostrum), which serves to protect the infant from disease.
IgE is usually associated with allergies and anaphylaxis. It is present in the lowest concentration in the blood,
because its Fc region binds strongly to an IgE-specific Fc receptor on the surfaces of mast cells. IgE makes mast cell
degranulation very specific, such that if a person is allergic to peanuts, there will be peanut-specific IgE bound to
their mast cells. In this person, eating peanuts will cause the mast cells to degranulate, sometimes causing severe
allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, a severe, systemic allergic response that can cause death.

Clonal Selection of B Cells
Clonal selection and expansion work much the same way in B cells as in T cells. Only B cells with appropriate
antigen specificity are selected for and expanded (Figure 21.23). Eventually, the plasma cells secrete antibodies
with antigenic specificity identical to those that were on the surfaces of the selected B cells. Notice in the figure that
both plasma cells and memory B cells are generated simultaneously.

FIGURE 21.23
Clonal Selection of B Cells
During a primary B cell immune response, both antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory
B cells are produced. These memory cells lead to the differentiation of more plasma cells and memory B cells during secondary responses.

Primary versus Secondary B Cell Responses
Primary and secondary responses as they relate to T cells were discussed earlier. This section will look at these
responses with B cells and antibody production. Because antibodies are easily obtained from blood samples, they
are easy to follow and graph (Figure 21.24). As you will see from the figure, the primary response to an antigen
(representing a pathogen) is delayed by several days. This is the time it takes for the B cell clones to expand and
differentiate into plasma cells. The level of antibody produced is low, but it is sufficient for immune protection. The
second time a person encounters the same antigen, there is no time delay, and the amount of antibody made is
much higher. Thus, the secondary antibody response overwhelms the pathogens quickly and, in most situations, no
symptoms are felt. When a different antigen is used, another primary response is made with its low antibody levels
and time delay.

FIGURE 21.24
Primary and Secondary Antibody Responses
Antigen A is given once to generate a primary response and later to
generate a secondary response. When a different antigen is given for the first time, a new primary response is made.

Active versus Passive Immunity
Immunity to pathogens, and the ability to control pathogen growth so that damage to the tissues of the body is
limited, can be acquired by (1) the active development of an immune response in the infected individual or (2) the
passive transfer of immune components from an immune individual to a nonimmune one. Both active and passive
immunity have examples in the natural world and as part of medicine.
Active immunity is the resistance to pathogens acquired during an adaptive immune response within an individual
(Table 21.6). Naturally acquired active immunity, the response to a pathogen, is the focus of this chapter. Artificially
acquired active immunity involves the use of vaccines. A vaccine is a killed or weakened pathogen or its components
that, when administered to a healthy individual, leads to the development of immunological memory (a weakened
primary immune response) without causing much in the way of symptoms. Thus, with the use of vaccines, one can
avoid the damage from disease that results from the first exposure to the pathogen, yet reap the benefits of
protection from immunological memory. The advent of vaccines was one of the major medical advances of the
twentieth century and led to the eradication of smallpox and the control of many infectious diseases, including polio,
measles, and whooping cough.

Active versus Passive Immunity
Natural
Artificial
Active
Adaptive immune response
Vaccine response
Passive
Trans-placental antibodies/breastfeeding
Immune globulin injections
TABLE 21.6

Passive immunity arises from the transfer of antibodies to an individual without requiring them to mount their own
active immune response. Naturally acquired passive immunity is seen during fetal development. IgG is transferred
from the maternal circulation to the fetus via the placenta, protecting the fetus from infection and protecting the
newborn for the first few months of its life. As already stated, a newborn benefits from the IgA antibodies it obtains
from milk during breastfeeding. The fetus and newborn thus benefit from the immunological memory based on the
pathogens to which the pregnant person has been exposed. In medicine, artificially acquired passive immunity
usually involves injections of immunoglobulins, taken from animals previously exposed to a specific pathogen. This
treatment is a fast-acting method of temporarily protecting an individual who was possibly exposed to a pathogen.
The downside to both types of passive immunity is the lack of the development of immunological memory. Once the
antibodies are transferred, they are effective for only a limited time before they degrade.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Immunity can be acquired in an active or passive way, and it can be natural or artificial. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/immunity) to see an animated discussion of passive and active immunity. What is an example
of natural immunity acquired passively?

T cell-dependent versus T cell-independent Antigens
As discussed previously, Th2 cells secrete cytokines that drive the production of antibodies in a B cell, responding to
complex antigens such as those made by proteins. On the other hand, some antigens are T cell independent. A T
cell-independent antigen usually is in the form of repeated carbohydrate moieties found on the cell walls of
bacteria. Each antibody on the B cell surface has two binding sites, and the repeated nature of T cell-independent
antigen leads to crosslinking of the surface antibodies on the B cell. The crosslinking is enough to activate it in the
absence of T cell cytokines.
A T cell-dependent antigen, on the other hand, usually is not repeated to the same degree on the pathogen and
thus does not crosslink surface antibody with the same efficiency. To elicit a response to such antigens, the B and T
cells must come close together (Figure 21.25). The B cell must receive two signals to become activated. Its surface
immunoglobulin must recognize native antigen. Some of this antigen is internalized, processed, and presented to
the Th2 cells on a class II MHC molecule. The T cell then binds using its antigen receptor and is activated to secrete
cytokines that diffuse to the B cell, finally activating it completely. Thus, the B cell receives signals from both its
surface antibody and the T cell via its cytokines, and acts as a professional antigen-presenting cell in the process.

FIGURE 21.25
T and B Cell Binding
To elicit a response to a T cell-dependent antigen, the B and T cells must come close together. To
become fully activated, the B cell must receive two signals from the native antigen and the T cell’s cytokines.
