15.4 Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the classes of pharmaceuticals that interact with the autonomic nervous system
•
Differentiate between cholinergic and adrenergic compounds
•
Differentiate between sympathomimetic and sympatholytic drugs
•
Relate the consequences of nicotine abuse with respect to autonomic control of the cardiovascular system
An important way to understand the effects of native neurochemicals in the autonomic system is in considering the
effects of pharmaceutical drugs. This can be considered in terms of how drugs change autonomic function. These
effects will primarily be based on how drugs act at the receptors of the autonomic system neurochemistry. The
signaling molecules of the nervous system interact with proteins in the cell membranes of various target cells. In
fact, no effect can be attributed to just the signaling molecules themselves without considering the receptors. A
chemical that the body produces to interact with those receptors is called an endogenous chemical, whereas a
chemical introduced to the system from outside is an exogenous chemical. Exogenous chemicals may be of a
natural origin, such as a plant extract, or they may be synthetically produced in a pharmaceutical laboratory.
Broad Autonomic Effects
One important drug that affects the autonomic system broadly is not a pharmaceutical therapeutic agent associated
with the system. This drug is nicotine. The effects of nicotine on the autonomic nervous system are important in
considering the role smoking can play in health.
All ganglionic neurons of the autonomic system, in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia, are activated by
ACh released from preganglionic fibers. The ACh receptors on these neurons are of the nicotinic type, meaning that
they are ligand-gated ion channels. When the neurotransmitter released from the preganglionic fiber binds to the
receptor protein, a channel opens to allow positive ions to cross the cell membrane. The result is depolarization of
the ganglia. Nicotine acts as an ACh analog at these synapses, so when someone takes in the drug, it binds to these
ACh receptors and activates the ganglionic neurons, causing them to depolarize.
Ganglia of both divisions are activated equally by the drug. For many target organs in the body, this results in no net
change. The competing inputs to the system cancel each other out and nothing significant happens. For example,
the sympathetic system will cause sphincters in the digestive tract to contract, limiting digestive propulsion, but the
parasympathetic system will cause the contraction of other muscles in the digestive tract, which will try to push the
contents of the digestive system along. The end result is that the food does not really move along and the digestive
system has not appreciably changed.
The system in which this can be problematic is in the cardiovascular system, which is why smoking is a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. First, there is no significant parasympathetic regulation of blood pressure. Only a limited
number of blood vessels are affected by parasympathetic input, so nicotine will preferentially cause the vascular
tone to become more sympathetic, which means blood pressure will be increased. Second, the autonomic control of
the heart is special. Unlike skeletal or smooth muscles, cardiac muscle is intrinsically active, meaning that it
generates its own action potentials. The autonomic system does not cause the heart to beat, it just speeds it up
(sympathetic) or slows it down (parasympathetic). The mechanisms for this are not mutually exclusive, so the heart
receives conflicting signals, and the rhythm of the heart can be affected (Figure 15.13).
FIGURE 15.13
Autonomic Connections to Heart and Blood Vessels
The nicotinic receptor is found on all autonomic ganglia, but the
cardiovascular connections are particular, and do not conform to the usual competitive projections that would just cancel each other out
when stimulated by nicotine. The opposing signals to the heart would both depolarize and hyperpolarize the heart cells that establish the
rhythm of the heartbeat, likely causing arrhythmia. Only the sympathetic system governs systemic blood pressure so nicotine would cause
an increase.
Sympathetic Effect
The neurochemistry of the sympathetic system is based on the adrenergic system. Norepinephrine and epinephrine
influence target effectors by binding to the α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors. Drugs that affect the
sympathetic system affect these chemical systems. The drugs can be classified by whether they enhance the
functions of the sympathetic system or interrupt those functions. A drug that enhances adrenergic function is known
as a sympathomimetic drug, whereas a drug that interrupts adrenergic function is a sympatholytic drug.
Sympathomimetic Drugs
When the sympathetic system is not functioning correctly or the body is in a state of homeostatic imbalance, these
drugs act at postganglionic terminals and synapses in the sympathetic efferent pathway. These drugs either bind to
particular adrenergic receptors and mimic norepinephrine at the synapses between sympathetic postganglionic
fibers and their targets, or they increase the production and release of norepinephrine from postganglionic fibers.
Also, to increase the effectiveness of adrenergic chemicals released from the fibers, some of these drugs may block
the removal or reuptake of the neurotransmitter from the synapse.
A common sympathomimetic drug is phenylephrine, which is a common component of decongestants. It can also be
used to dilate the pupil and to raise blood pressure. Phenylephrine is known as an α1-adrenergic agonist, meaning
that it binds to a specific adrenergic receptor, stimulating a response. In this role, phenylephrine will bind to the
adrenergic receptors in bronchioles of the lungs and cause them to dilate. By opening these structures, accumulated
mucus can be cleared out of the lower respiratory tract. Phenylephrine is often paired with other pharmaceuticals,
such as analgesics, as in the “sinus” version of many over-the-counter drugs, such as Tylenol Sinus® or Excedrin
Sinus®, or in expectorants for chest congestion such as in Robitussin CF®.
A related molecule, called pseudoephedrine, was much more commonly used in these applications than was
phenylephrine, until the molecule became useful in the illicit production of amphetamines. Phenylephrine is not as
effective as a drug because it can be partially broken down in the digestive tract before it is ever absorbed. Like the
adrenergic agents, phenylephrine is effective in dilating the pupil, known as mydriasis (Figure 15.14).
Phenylephrine is used during an eye exam in an ophthalmologist’s or optometrist’s office for this purpose. It can
also be used to increase blood pressure in situations in which cardiac function is compromised, such as under
anesthesia or during septic shock.
FIGURE 15.14
Mydriasis
The sympathetic system causes pupillary dilation when norepinephrine binds to an adrenergic receptor in the
radial fibers of the iris smooth muscle. Phenylephrine mimics this action by binding to the same receptor when drops are applied onto the
surface of the eye in a doctor’s office. (credit: Corey Theiss / Vulegenda/Wikimedia Commons)
Other drugs that enhance adrenergic function are not associated with therapeutic uses, but affect the functions of
the sympathetic system in a similar fashion. Cocaine primarily interferes with the uptake of dopamine at the synapse
and can also increase adrenergic function. Caffeine is an antagonist to a different neurotransmitter receptor, called
the adenosine receptor. Adenosine will suppress adrenergic activity, specifically the release of norepinephrine at
synapses, so caffeine indirectly increases adrenergic activity. There is some evidence that caffeine can aid in the
therapeutic use of drugs, perhaps by potentiating (increasing) sympathetic function, as is suggested by the inclusion
of caffeine in over-the-counter analgesics such as Excedrin®.
Sympatholytic Drugs
Drugs that interfere with sympathetic function are referred to as sympatholytic, or sympathoplegic, drugs. They
primarily work as an antagonist to the adrenergic receptors. They block the ability of norepinephrine or epinephrine
to bind to the receptors so that the effect is “cut” or “takes a blow,” to refer to the endings “-lytic” and “-plegic,”
respectively. The various drugs of this class will be specific to α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors, or to their
receptor subtypes.
Possibly the most familiar type of sympatholytic drug are the β-blockers. These drugs are often used to treat
cardiovascular disease because they block the β-receptors associated with vasoconstriction and cardioacceleration.
By allowing blood vessels to dilate, or keeping heart rate from increasing, these drugs can improve cardiac function
in a compromised system, such as for a person with congestive heart failure or who has previously suffered a heart
attack. A couple of common versions of β-blockers are metoprolol, which specifically blocks the β1-receptor, and
propanolol, which nonspecifically blocks β-receptors. There are other drugs that are α-blockers and can affect the
sympathetic system in a similar way.
Other uses for sympatholytic drugs are as antianxiety medications. A common example of this is clonidine, which is
an α-agonist. The sympathetic system is tied to anxiety to the point that the sympathetic response can be referred
to as “fight, flight, or fright.” Clonidine is used for other treatments aside from hypertension and anxiety, including
pain conditions and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Parasympathetic Effects
Drugs affecting parasympathetic functions can be classified into those that increase or decrease activity at
postganglionic terminals. Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers release ACh, and the receptors on the targets are
muscarinic receptors. There are several types of muscarinic receptors, M1–M5, but the drugs are not usually
specific to the specific types. Parasympathetic drugs can be either muscarinic agonists or antagonists, or have
indirect effects on the cholinergic system. Drugs that enhance cholinergic effects are called parasympathomimetic
drugs, whereas those that inhibit cholinergic effects are referred to as anticholinergic drugs.
Pilocarpine is a nonspecific muscarinic agonist commonly used to treat disorders of the eye. It reverses mydriasis,
such as is caused by phenylephrine, and can be administered after an eye exam. Along with constricting the pupil
through the smooth muscle of the iris, pilocarpine will also cause the ciliary muscle to contract. This will open
perforations at the base of the cornea, allowing for the drainage of aqueous humor from the anterior compartment
of the eye and, therefore, reducing intraocular pressure related to glaucoma.
Atropine and scopolamine are part of a class of muscarinic antagonists that come from the Atropa genus of plants
that include belladonna or deadly nightshade (Figure 15.15). The name of one of these plants, belladonna, refers to
the fact that extracts from this plant were used cosmetically for dilating the pupil. The active chemicals from this
plant block the muscarinic receptors in the iris and allow the pupil to dilate, which is considered attractive because
it makes the eyes appear larger. Humans are instinctively attracted to anything with larger eyes, which comes from
the fact that the ratio of eye-to-head size is different in infants (or baby animals) and can elicit an emotional
response. The cosmetic use of belladonna extract was essentially acting on this response. Atropine is no longer
used in this cosmetic capacity for reasons related to the other name for the plant, which is deadly nightshade.
Suppression of parasympathetic function, especially when it becomes systemic, can be fatal. Autonomic regulation
is disrupted and anticholinergic symptoms develop. The berries of this plant are highly toxic, but can be mistaken for
other berries. The antidote for atropine or scopolamine poisoning is pilocarpine.
FIGURE 15.15
Belladonna Plant
The plant from the genus Atropa, which is known as belladonna or deadly nightshade, was used
cosmetically to dilate pupils, but can be fatal when ingested. The berries on the plant may seem attractive as a fruit, but they contain the
same anticholinergic compounds as the rest of the plant.

Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Effects of Different Drug Types
Drug type
Example(s)
Sympathetic effect
Parasympathetic
effect
Overall result
Nicotinic agonists
Nicotine
Mimic ACh at
preganglionic
synapses, causing
activation of
postganglionic fibers
and the release of
norepinephrine onto
the target organ
Mimic ACh at
preganglionic
synapses, causing
activation of
postganglionic fibers
and the release of
ACh onto the target
organ
Most conflicting
signals cancel each
other out, but
cardiovascular
system is
susceptible to
hypertension and
arrhythmias
Sympathomimetic
drugs
Phenylephrine
Bind to adrenergic
receptors or mimics
sympathetic action in
some other way
No effect
Increase
sympathetic tone
Sympatholytic
drugs
β-blockers
such as
propanolol or
metoprolol; α-
agonists such
as clonidine
Block binding to
adrenergic drug or
decrease adrenergic
signals
No effect
Increase
parasympathetic
tone
Parasymphatho-
mimetics/
muscarinic
agonists
Pilocarpine
No effect, except on
sweat glands
Bind to muscarinic
receptor, similar to
ACh
Increase
parasympathetic
tone
Anticholinergics/
muscarinic
antagonists
Atropine,
scopolamine,
dimenhydrinate
No effect
Block muscarinic
receptors and
parasympathetic
function
Increase
sympathetic tone
TABLE 15.2

Disorders of the...
Autonomic Nervous System
Approximately 33 percent of people experience a mild problem with motion sickness, whereas up to 66 percent
experience motion sickness under extreme conditions, such as being on a tossing boat with no view of the
horizon. Connections between regions in the brain stem and the autonomic system result in the symptoms of
nausea, cold sweats, and vomiting.
The part of the brain responsible for vomiting, or emesis, is known as the area postrema. It is located next to the
fourth ventricle and is not restricted by the blood–brain barrier, which allows it to respond to chemicals in the
bloodstream—namely, toxins that will stimulate emesis. There are significant connections between this area, the
solitary nucleus, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. These autonomic system and nuclei
connections are associated with the symptoms of motion sickness.
Motion sickness is the result of conflicting information from the visual and vestibular systems. If motion is
perceived by the visual system without the complementary vestibular stimuli, or through vestibular stimuli
without visual confirmation, the brain stimulates emesis and the associated symptoms. The area postrema, by
itself, appears to be able to stimulate emesis in response to toxins in the blood, but it is also connected to the
autonomic system and can trigger a similar response to motion.
Autonomic drugs are used to combat motion sickness. Though it is often described as a dangerous and deadly
drug, scopolamine is used to treat motion sickness. A popular treatment for motion sickness is the transdermal
scopolamine patch. Scopolamine is one of the substances derived from the Atropa genus along with atropine. At
higher doses, those substances are thought to be poisonous and can lead to an extreme sympathetic syndrome.
However, the transdermal patch regulates the release of the drug, and the concentration is kept very low so that
the dangers are avoided. For those who are concerned about using “The Most Dangerous Drug,” as some
websites will call it, antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate (Dramamine®) can be used.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/3Dmovies) to learn about the side effects of 3-D movies. As discussed in this
video, movies that are shot in 3-D can cause motion sickness, which elicits the autonomic symptoms of nausea and
sweating. The disconnection between the perceived motion on the screen and the lack of any change in equilibrium
stimulates these symptoms. Why do you think sitting close to the screen or right in the middle of the theater makes
motion sickness during a 3-D movie worse?

