23.3 The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structures of the mouth, including its three accessory digestive organs
•
Group the 32 adult teeth according to name, location, and function
•
Describe the process of swallowing, including the roles of the tongue, upper esophageal sphincter, and
epiglottis
•
Trace the pathway food follows from ingestion into the mouth through release into the stomach
In this section, you will examine the anatomy and functions of the three main organs of the upper alimentary
canal—the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus—as well as three associated accessory organs—the tongue, salivary
glands, and teeth.

The Mouth
The cheeks, tongue, and palate frame the mouth, which is also called the oral cavity (or buccal cavity). The
structures of the mouth are illustrated in Figure 23.7.
At the entrance to the mouth are the lips, or labia (singular = labium). Their outer covering is skin, which transitions
to a mucous membrane in the mouth proper. Lips are very vascular with a thin layer of keratin; hence, the reason
they are "red." They have a huge representation on the cerebral cortex, which probably explains the human
fascination with kissing! The lips cover the orbicularis oris muscle, which regulates what comes in and goes out of
the mouth. The labial frenulum is a midline fold of mucous membrane that attaches the inner surface of each lip to
the gum. The cheeks make up the oral cavity’s sidewalls. While their outer covering is skin, their inner covering is
mucous membrane. This membrane is made up of non-keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. Between the
skin and mucous membranes are connective tissue and buccinator muscles. The next time you eat some food,
notice how the buccinator muscles in your cheeks and the orbicularis oris muscle in your lips contract, helping you
keep the food from falling out of your mouth. Additionally, notice how these muscles work when you are speaking.
The pocket-like part of the mouth that is framed on the inside by the gums and teeth, and on the outside by the
cheeks and lips is called the oral vestibule. Moving farther into the mouth, the opening between the oral cavity and
throat (oropharynx) is called the fauces (like the kitchen "faucet"). The main open area of the mouth, or oral cavity
proper, runs from the gums and teeth to the fauces.
When you are chewing, you do not find it difficult to breathe simultaneously. The next time you have food in your
mouth, notice how the arched shape of the roof of your mouth allows you to handle both digestion and respiration at
the same time. This arch is called the palate. The anterior region of the palate serves as a wall (or septum) between
the oral and nasal cavities as well as a rigid shelf against which the tongue can push food. It is created by the
maxillary and palatine bones of the skull and, given its bony structure, is known as the hard palate. If you run your
tongue along the roof of your mouth, you’ll notice that the hard palate ends in the posterior oral cavity, and the
tissue becomes fleshier. This part of the palate, known as the soft palate, is composed mainly of skeletal muscle.
You can therefore manipulate, subconsciously, the soft palate—for instance, to yawn, swallow, or sing (see Figure
23.7).

FIGURE 23.7
Mouth
The mouth includes the lips, tongue, palate, gums, and teeth.

A fleshy bead of tissue called the uvula drops down from the center of the posterior edge of the soft palate. Although
some have suggested that the uvula is a vestigial organ, it serves an important purpose. When you swallow, the soft
palate and uvula move upward, helping to keep foods and liquid from entering the nasal cavity. Unfortunately, it can
also contribute to the sound produced by snoring. Two muscular folds extend downward from the soft palate, on
either side of the uvula. Toward the front, the palatoglossal arch lies next to the base of the tongue; behind it, the
palatopharyngeal arch forms the superior and lateral margins of the fauces. Between these two arches are the
palatine tonsils, clusters of lymphoid tissue that protect the pharynx. The lingual tonsils are located at the base of
the tongue.

The Tongue
Perhaps you have heard it said that the tongue is the strongest muscle in the body. Those who stake this claim cite
its strength proportionate to its size. Although it is difficult to quantify the relative strength of different muscles, it
remains indisputable that the tongue is a workhorse, facilitating ingestion, mechanical digestion, chemical digestion
(lingual lipase), sensation (of taste, texture, and temperature of food), swallowing, and vocalization.
The tongue is attached to the mandible, the styloid processes of the temporal bones, and the hyoid bone. The hyoid
is unique in that it only distantly/indirectly articulates with other bones. The tongue is positioned over the floor of
the oral cavity. A medial septum extends the entire length of the tongue, dividing it into symmetrical halves.
Beneath its mucous membrane covering, each half of the tongue is composed of the same number and type of
intrinsic and extrinsic skeletal muscles. The intrinsic muscles (those within the tongue) are the longitudinalis
inferior, longitudinalis superior, transversus linguae, and verticalis linguae muscles. These allow you to change the
size and shape of your tongue, as well as to stick it out, if you wish. Having such a flexible tongue facilitates both
swallowing and speech.
As you learned in your study of the muscular system, the extrinsic muscles of the tongue are the palatoglossus,
hyoglossus, styloglossus, and genioglossus muscles. These muscles originate outside the tongue and insert into
connective tissues within the tongue. The mylohyoid is responsible for raising the tongue, the hyoglossus pulls it
down and back, the styloglossus pulls it up and back, and the genioglossus pulls it forward. Working in concert,
these muscles perform three important digestive functions in the mouth: (1) position food for optimal chewing, (2)
gather food into a bolus (rounded mass), and (3) position food so it can be swallowed.
The top and sides of the tongue are studded with papillae, extensions of lamina propria of the mucosa, which are
covered in stratified squamous epithelium (Figure 23.8). Fungiform papillae, which are mushroom shaped, cover a
large area of the tongue; they tend to be larger toward the rear of the tongue and smaller on the tip and sides. In
contrast, filiform papillae are long and thin. Fungiform papillae contain taste buds, and filiform papillae have touch
receptors that help the tongue move food around in the mouth. The filiform papillae create an abrasive surface that
performs mechanically, much like a cat’s rough tongue that is used for grooming. Lingual glands in the lamina
propria of the tongue secrete mucus and a watery serous fluid that contains the enzyme lingual lipase, which plays
a minor role in breaking down triglycerides but does not begin working until it is activated in the stomach. A fold of
mucous membrane on the underside of the tongue, the lingual frenulum, tethers the tongue to the floor of the
mouth. People with the congenital anomaly ankyloglossia, also known by the non-medical term “tongue tie,” have a
lingual frenulum that is too short or otherwise malformed. Severe ankyloglossia can impair speech and must be
corrected with surgery.

FIGURE 23.8
Tongue
This superior view of the tongue shows the locations and types of lingual papillae.

The Salivary Glands
Many small salivary glands are housed within the mucous membranes of the mouth and tongue. These minor
exocrine glands are constantly secreting saliva, either directly into the oral cavity or indirectly through ducts, even
while you sleep. In fact, an average of 1 to 1.5 liters of saliva is secreted each day. Usually just enough saliva is
present to moisten the mouth and teeth. Secretion increases when you eat, because saliva is essential to moisten
food and initiate the chemical breakdown of carbohydrates. Small amounts of saliva are also secreted by the labial
glands in the lips. In addition, the buccal glands in the cheeks, palatal glands in the palate, and lingual glands in the
tongue help ensure that all areas of the mouth are supplied with adequate saliva.

The Major Salivary Glands
Outside the oral mucosa are three pairs of major salivary glands, which secrete the majority of saliva into ducts that
open into the mouth:
•
The submandibular glands, which are in the floor of the mouth, secrete saliva into the mouth through the
submandibular ducts.
•
The sublingual glands, which lie below the tongue, use the lesser sublingual ducts to secrete saliva into the
oral cavity.
•
The parotid glands lie between the skin and the masseter muscle, near the ears. They secrete saliva into the
mouth through the parotid duct, which is located near the second upper molar tooth (Figure 23.9).

Saliva
Saliva is essentially (98 to 99.5 percent) water. The remaining 4.5 percent is a complex mixture of ions,
glycoproteins, enzymes, growth factors, and waste products. Perhaps the most important ingredient in saliva from
the perspective of digestion is the enzyme salivary amylase, which initiates the breakdown of carbohydrates. Food
does not spend enough time in the mouth to allow all the carbohydrates to break down, but salivary amylase
continues acting until it is inactivated by stomach acids. Bicarbonate and phosphate ions function as chemical
buffers, maintaining saliva at a pH between 6.35 and 6.85. Salivary mucus helps lubricate food, facilitating
movement in the mouth, bolus formation, and swallowing. Saliva contains immunoglobulin A, which prevents
microbes from penetrating the epithelium, and lysozyme, which makes saliva antimicrobial. Saliva also contains
epidermal growth factor, which might have given rise to the adage “a mother’s kiss can heal a wound.”
Each of the major salivary glands secretes a unique formulation of saliva according to its cellular makeup. For
example, the parotid glands secrete a watery solution that contains salivary amylase. The submandibular glands
have cells similar to those of the parotid glands, as well as mucus-secreting cells. Therefore, saliva secreted by the
submandibular glands also contains amylase but in a liquid thickened with mucus. The sublingual glands contain
mostly mucous cells, and they secrete the thickest saliva with the least amount of salivary amylase.

FIGURE 23.9
Salivary glands
The major salivary glands are located outside the oral mucosa and deliver saliva into the mouth through
ducts.

HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
The Parotid Glands: Mumps
Infections of the nasal passages and pharynx can attack any salivary gland. The parotid glands are the usual site of
infection with the virus that causes mumps (paramyxovirus). Mumps manifests by enlargement and inflammation of
the parotid glands, causing a characteristic swelling between the ears and the jaw. Symptoms include fever and
throat pain, which can be severe when swallowing acidic substances such as orange juice.
In about one-third of males who are past puberty, mumps also causes testicular inflammation, typically affecting
only one testis and rarely resulting in sterility. With the increasing use and effectiveness of mumps vaccines, the
incidence of mumps has decreased dramatically. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), the number of mumps cases dropped from more than 150,000 in 1968 to fewer than 1700 in 1993 to only
11 reported cases in 2011.

Regulation of Salivation
The autonomic nervous system regulates salivation (the secretion of saliva). In the absence of food,
parasympathetic stimulation keeps saliva flowing at just the right level for comfort as you speak, swallow, sleep, and
generally go about life. Over-salivation can occur, for example, if you are stimulated by the smell of food, but that
food is not available for you to eat. Drooling is an extreme instance of the overproduction of saliva. During times of
stress, such as before speaking in public, sympathetic stimulation takes over, reducing salivation and producing the
symptom of dry mouth often associated with anxiety. When you are dehydrated, salivation is reduced, causing the
mouth to feel dry and prompting you to take action to quench your thirst.
Salivation can be stimulated by the sight, smell, and taste of food. It can even be stimulated by thinking about food.
You might notice whether reading about food and salivation right now has had any effect on your production of
saliva.
How does the salivation process work while you are eating? Food contains chemicals that stimulate taste receptors
on the tongue, which send impulses to the superior and inferior salivatory nuclei in the brain stem. These two nuclei
then send back parasympathetic impulses through fibers in the glossopharyngeal and facial nerves, which stimulate
salivation. Even after you swallow food, salivation is increased to cleanse the mouth and to water down and
neutralize any irritating chemical remnants, such as that hot sauce in your burrito. Most saliva is swallowed along
with food and is reabsorbed, so that fluid is not lost.

The Teeth
The teeth, or dentes (singular = dens), are organs similar to bones that you use to tear, grind, and otherwise
mechanically break down food.
Types of Teeth
During the course of your lifetime, you have two sets of teeth (one set of teeth is a dentition). Your 20 deciduous
teeth, or baby teeth, first begin to appear at about 6 months of age. Between approximately age 6 and 12, these
teeth are replaced by 32 permanent teeth. Moving from the center of the mouth toward the side, these are as
follows (Figure 23.10):
•
The eight incisors, four top and four bottom, are the sharp front teeth you use for biting into food.
•
The four cuspids (or canines) flank the incisors and have a pointed edge (cusp) to tear up food. These fang-like
teeth are superb for piercing tough or fleshy foods.
•
Posterior to the cuspids are the eight premolars (or bicuspids), which have an overall flatter shape with two
rounded cusps useful for mashing foods.
•
The most posterior and largest are the 12 molars, which have several pointed cusps used to crush food so it is
ready for swallowing. The third members of each set of three molars, top and bottom, are commonly referred to
as the wisdom teeth, because their eruption is commonly delayed until early adulthood. It is not uncommon for
wisdom teeth to fail to erupt; that is, they remain impacted. In these cases, the teeth are typically removed by
orthodontic surgery.

FIGURE 23.10
Permanent and Deciduous Teeth
This figure of two human dentitions shows the arrangement of teeth in the maxilla
and mandible, and the relationship between the deciduous and permanent teeth.

Anatomy of a Tooth
The teeth are secured in the alveolar processes (sockets) of the maxilla and the mandible. Gingivae (commonly
called the gums) are soft tissues that line the alveolar processes and surround the necks of the teeth. Teeth are also
held in their sockets by a connective tissue called the periodontal ligament.
The two main parts of a tooth are the crown, which is the portion projecting above the gum line, and the root, which
is embedded within the maxilla and mandible. Both parts contain an inner pulp cavity, containing loose connective
tissue through which run nerves and blood vessels. The region of the pulp cavity that runs through the root of the
tooth is called the root canal. Surrounding the pulp cavity is dentin, a bone-like tissue. In the root of each tooth, the
dentin is covered by an even harder bone-like layer called cementum. In the crown of each tooth, the dentin is
covered by an outer layer of enamel, the hardest substance in the body (Figure 23.11).
Although enamel protects the underlying dentin and pulp cavity, it is still nonetheless susceptible to mechanical and
chemical erosion, or what is known as tooth decay. The most common form, dental caries (cavities) develops when
colonies of bacteria feeding on sugars in the mouth release acids that cause soft tissue inflammation and
degradation of the calcium crystals of the enamel. The digestive functions of the mouth are summarized in Table
23.4.

FIGURE 23.11
The Structure of the Tooth
This longitudinal section through a molar in its alveolar socket shows the relationships
between enamel, dentin, and pulp.

Digestive Functions of the Mouth
Structure
Action
Outcome
Lips and
cheeks
Confine food
between teeth
•
Food is chewed evenly during mastication
Salivary
glands
Secrete saliva
•
Moisten and lubricate the lining of the mouth and pharynx
•
Moisten, soften, and dissolve food
•
Clean the mouth and teeth
•
Salivary amylase breaks down starch
Tongue’s
extrinsic
muscles
Move tongue
sideways, and in
and out
•
Manipulate food for chewing
•
Shape food into a bolus
•
Manipulate food for swallowing
Tongue’s
intrinsic
muscles
Change tongue
shape
•
Manipulate food for swallowing
Taste buds
Sense food in
mouth and sense
taste
•
Nerve impulses from taste buds are conducted to salivary nuclei in the
brain stem and then to salivary glands, stimulating saliva secretion
Lingual
glands
Secrete lingual
lipase
•
Activated in the stomach
•
Break down triglycerides into fatty acids and diglycerides
Teeth
Shred and crush
food
•
Break down solid food into smaller particles for deglutition
TABLE 23.4

The Pharynx
The pharynx (throat) is involved in both digestion and respiration. It receives food and air from the mouth, and air
from the nasal cavities. When food enters the pharynx, involuntary muscle contractions close off the air
passageways.
A short tube of skeletal muscle lined with a mucous membrane, the pharynx runs from the posterior oral and nasal
cavities to the opening of the esophagus and larynx. It has three subdivisions. The most superior, the nasopharynx,
is involved only in breathing and speech. The other two subdivisions, the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx, are
used for both breathing and digestion. The oropharynx begins inferior to the nasopharynx and is continuous below
with the laryngopharynx (Figure 23.12). The inferior border of the laryngopharynx connects to the esophagus,
whereas the anterior portion connects to the larynx, allowing air to flow into the bronchial tree.

FIGURE 23.12
Pharynx
The pharynx runs from the nostrils to the esophagus and the larynx.

Histologically, the wall of the oropharynx is similar to that of the oral cavity. The mucosa includes a stratified
squamous epithelium that is endowed with mucus-producing glands. During swallowing, the elevator skeletal
muscles of the pharynx contract, raising and expanding the pharynx to receive the bolus of food. Once received,
these muscles relax and the constrictor muscles of the pharynx contract, forcing the bolus into the esophagus and
initiating peristalsis.
Usually during swallowing, the soft palate and uvula rise reflexively to close off the entrance to the nasopharynx. At
the same time, the larynx is pulled superiorly and the cartilaginous epiglottis, its most superior structure, folds
inferiorly, covering the glottis (the opening to the larynx); this process effectively blocks access to the trachea and
bronchi. When the food “goes down the wrong way,” it goes into the trachea. When food enters the trachea, the
reaction is to cough, which usually forces the food up and out of the trachea, and back into the pharynx.

The Esophagus
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the pharynx to the stomach. It is approximately 25.4 cm (10 in) in
length, located posterior to the trachea, and remains in a collapsed form when not engaged in swallowing. As you
can see in Figure 23.13, the esophagus runs a mainly straight route through the mediastinum of the thorax. To enter
the abdomen, the esophagus penetrates the diaphragm through an opening called the esophageal hiatus.

Passage of Food through the Esophagus
The upper esophageal sphincter, which is continuous with the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, controls the
movement of food from the pharynx into the esophagus. The upper two-thirds of the esophagus consists of both
smooth and skeletal muscle fibers, with the latter fading out in the bottom third of the esophagus. Rhythmic waves
of peristalsis, which begin in the upper esophagus, propel the bolus of food toward the stomach. Meanwhile,
secretions from the esophageal mucosa lubricate the esophagus and food. Food passes from the esophagus into the
stomach at the lower esophageal sphincter (also called the gastroesophageal or cardiac sphincter). Recall that
sphincters are muscles that surround tubes and serve as valves, closing the tube when the sphincters contract and
opening it when they relax. The lower esophageal sphincter relaxes to let food pass into the stomach, and then
contracts to prevent stomach acids from backing up into the esophagus. Surrounding this sphincter is the muscular
diaphragm, which helps close off the sphincter when no food is being swallowed. When the lower esophageal
sphincter does not completely close, the stomach’s contents can reflux (that is, back up into the esophagus),
causing heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

FIGURE 23.13
Esophagus
The upper esophageal sphincter controls the movement of food from the pharynx to the esophagus. The
lower esophageal sphincter controls the movement of food from the esophagus to the stomach.

Histology of the Esophagus
The mucosa of the esophagus is made up of an epithelial lining that contains non-keratinized, stratified squamous
epithelium, with a layer of basal and parabasal cells. This epithelium protects against erosion from food particles.
The mucosa’s lamina propria contains mucus-secreting glands. The muscularis layer changes according to location:
In the upper third of the esophagus, the muscularis is skeletal muscle. In the middle third, it is both skeletal and
smooth muscle. In the lower third, it is smooth muscle. As mentioned previously, the most superficial layer of the
esophagus is called the adventitia, not the serosa. In contrast to the stomach and intestines, the loose connective
tissue of the adventitia is not covered by a fold of visceral peritoneum. The digestive functions of the esophagus are
identified in Table 23.5.

Digestive Functions of the Esophagus
Action
Outcome
Upper esophageal
sphincter relaxation
Allows the bolus to move from the laryngopharynx to the esophagus
Peristalsis
Propels the bolus through the esophagus
Lower esophageal
sphincter relaxation
Allows the bolus to move from the esophagus into the stomach and prevents
chyme from entering the esophagus
Mucus secretion
Lubricates the esophagus, allowing easy passage of the bolus
TABLE 23.5

Deglutition
Deglutition is another word for swallowing—the movement of food from the mouth to the stomach. The entire
process takes about 4 to 8 seconds for solid or semisolid food, and about 1 second for very soft food and liquids.
Although this sounds quick and effortless, deglutition is, in fact, a complex process that involves both the skeletal
muscle of the tongue and the muscles of the pharynx and esophagus. It is aided by the presence of mucus and
saliva. There are three stages in deglutition: the voluntary phase, the pharyngeal phase, and the esophageal phase
(Figure 23.14). The autonomic nervous system controls the latter two phases.

FIGURE 23.14
Deglutition
Deglutition includes the voluntary phase and two involuntary phases: the pharyngeal phase and the esophageal phase.

The Voluntary Phase
The voluntary phase of deglutition (also known as the oral or buccal phase) is so called because you can control
when you swallow food. In this phase, chewing has been completed and swallowing is set in motion. The tongue
moves upward and backward against the palate, pushing the bolus to the back of the oral cavity and into the
oropharynx. Other muscles keep the mouth closed and prevent food from falling out. At this point, the two
involuntary phases of swallowing begin.

The Pharyngeal Phase
In the pharyngeal phase, stimulation of receptors in the oropharynx sends impulses to the deglutition center (a
collection of neurons that controls swallowing) in the medulla oblongata. Impulses are then sent back to the uvula
and soft palate, causing them to move upward and close off the nasopharynx. The laryngeal muscles also constrict
to prevent aspiration of food into the trachea. At this point, deglutition apnea takes place, which means that
breathing ceases for a very brief time. Contractions of the pharyngeal constrictor muscles move the bolus through
the oropharynx and laryngopharynx. Relaxation of the upper esophageal sphincter then allows food to enter the
esophagus.

The Esophageal Phase
The entry of food into the esophagus marks the beginning of the esophageal phase of deglutition and the initiation of
peristalsis. As in the previous phase, the complex neuromuscular actions are controlled by the medulla oblongata.
Peristalsis propels the bolus through the esophagus and toward the stomach. The circular muscle layer of the
muscularis contracts, pinching the esophageal wall and forcing the bolus forward. At the same time, the longitudinal
muscle layer of the muscularis also contracts, shortening this area and pushing out its walls to receive the bolus. In
this way, a series of contractions keeps moving food toward the stomach. When the bolus nears the stomach,
distention of the esophagus initiates a short reflex relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter that allows the
bolus to pass into the stomach. During the esophageal phase, esophageal glands secrete mucus that lubricates the
bolus and minimizes friction.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/swallowing) to see how swallowing is a complex process that involves
the nervous system to coordinate the actions of upper respiratory and digestive activities. During which stage of
swallowing is there a risk of food entering respiratory pathways and how is this risk blocked?
