7.1 Divisions of the Skeletal System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the functions of the skeletal system
•
Distinguish between the axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton
•
Define the axial skeleton and its components
•
Define the appendicular skeleton and its components
The skeletal system includes all of the bones, cartilages, and ligaments of the body that support and give shape to
the body and body structures. The skeleton consists of the bones of the body. For adults, there are 206 bones in the
skeleton. Younger individuals have higher numbers of bones because some bones fuse together during childhood
and adolescence to form an adult bone. The primary functions of the skeleton are to provide a rigid, internal
structure that can support the weight of the body against the force of gravity, and to provide a structure upon which
muscles can act to produce movements of the body. The lower portion of the skeleton is specialized for stability
during walking or running. In contrast, the upper skeleton has greater mobility and ranges of motion, features that
allow you to lift and carry objects or turn your head and trunk.
In addition to providing for support and movements of the body, the skeleton has protective and storage functions.
It protects the internal organs, including the brain, spinal cord, heart, lungs, and pelvic organs. The bones of the
skeleton serve as the primary storage site for important minerals such as calcium and phosphate. The bone marrow
found within bones stores fat and houses the blood-cell producing tissue of the body.
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular.
The Axial Skeleton
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular. The axial skeleton forms the
vertical, central axis of the body and includes all bones of the head, neck, chest, and back (Figure 7.2). It serves to
protect the brain, spinal cord, heart, and lungs. It also serves as the attachment site for muscles that move the
head, neck, and back, and for muscles that act across the shoulder and hip joints to move their corresponding limbs.
The axial skeleton of the adult consists of 80 bones, including the skull, the vertebral column, and the thoracic
cage. The skull is formed by 22 bones. Also associated with the head are an additional seven bones, including the
hyoid bone and the ear ossicles (three small bones found in each middle ear). The vertebral column consists of 24
bones, each called a vertebra, plus the sacrum and coccyx. The thoracic cage includes the 12 pairs of ribs, and the
sternum, the flattened bone of the anterior chest.

FIGURE 7.2
Axial and Appendicular Skeleton
The axial skeleton supports the head, neck, back, and chest and thus forms the vertical
axis of the body. It consists of the skull, vertebral column (including the sacrum and coccyx), and the thoracic cage, formed by the ribs and
sternum. The appendicular skeleton is made up of all bones of the upper and lower limbs.
The Appendicular Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton includes all bones of the upper and lower limbs, plus the bones that attach each limb to
the axial skeleton. There are 126 bones in the appendicular skeleton of an adult. The bones of the appendicular
skeleton are covered in a separate chapter.
