4.2 Epithelial Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the structure and function of epithelial tissue
•
Distinguish between tight junctions, anchoring junctions, and gap junctions
•
Distinguish between simple epithelia and stratified epithelia, as well as between squamous, cuboidal, and
columnar epithelia
•
Describe the structure and function of endocrine and exocrine glands and their respective secretions
Most epithelial tissues are essentially large sheets of cells covering all the surfaces of the body exposed to the
outside world and lining the outside of organs. Epithelium also forms much of the glandular tissue of the body. Skin
is not the only area of the body exposed to the outside. Other areas include the airways, the digestive tract, as well
as the urinary and reproductive systems, all of which are lined by an epithelium. Hollow organs and body cavities
that do not connect to the exterior of the body, which includes, blood vessels and serous membranes, are lined by
endothelium (plural = endothelia), which is a type of epithelium.
Epithelial cells derive from all three major embryonic layers. The epithelia lining the skin, parts of the mouth and
nose, and the anus develop from the ectoderm. Cells lining the airways and most of the digestive system originate in
the endoderm. The epithelium that lines vessels in the lymphatic and cardiovascular system derives from the
mesoderm and is called an endothelium.
All epithelia share some important structural and functional features. This tissue is highly cellular, with little or no
extracellular material present between cells. Adjoining cells form a specialized intercellular connection between
their cell membranes called a cell junction. The epithelial cells exhibit polarity with differences in structure and
function between the exposed or apical facing surface of the cell and the basal surface close to the underlying body
structures. The basal lamina, a mixture of glycoproteins and collagen, provides an attachment site for the
epithelium, separating it from underlying connective tissue. The basal lamina attaches to a reticular lamina, which
is secreted by the underlying connective tissue, forming a basement membrane that helps hold it all together.
Epithelial tissues are nearly completely avascular. For instance, no blood vessels cross the basement membrane to
enter the tissue, and nutrients must come by diffusion or absorption from underlying tissues or the surface. Many
epithelial tissues are capable of rapidly replacing damaged and dead cells. Sloughing off of damaged or dead cells is
a characteristic of surface epithelium and allows our airways and digestive tracts to rapidly replace damaged cells
with new cells.
Generalized Functions of Epithelial Tissue
Epithelial tissues provide the body’s first line of protection from physical, chemical, and biological wear and tear.
The cells of an epithelium act as gatekeepers of the body controlling permeability and allowing selective transfer of
materials across a physical barrier. All substances that enter the body must cross an epithelium. Some epithelia
often include structural features that allow the selective transport of molecules and ions across their cell
membranes.
Many epithelial cells are capable of secretion and release mucous and specific chemical compounds onto their
apical surfaces. The epithelium of the small intestine releases digestive enzymes, for example. Cells lining the
respiratory tract secrete mucous that traps incoming microorganisms and particles. A glandular epithelium contains
many secretory cells.
The Epithelial Cell
Epithelial cells are typically characterized by the polarized distribution of organelles and membrane-bound proteins
between their basal and apical surfaces. Particular structures found in some epithelial cells are an adaptation to
specific functions. Certain organelles are segregated to the basal sides, whereas other organelles and extensions,
such as cilia, when present, are on the apical surface.
Cilia are microscopic extensions of the apical cell membrane that are supported by microtubules. They beat in
unison and move fluids as well as trapped particles. Ciliated epithelium lines the ventricles of the brain where it
helps circulate the cerebrospinal fluid. The ciliated epithelium of your airway forms a mucociliary escalator that
sweeps particles of dust and pathogens trapped in the secreted mucous toward the throat. It is called an escalator
because it continuously pushes mucous with trapped particles upward. In contrast, nasal cilia sweep the mucous
blanket down towards your throat. In both cases, the transported materials are usually swallowed, and end up in the
acidic environment of your stomach.
Cell to Cell Junctions
Cells of epithelia are closely connected and are not separated by intracellular material. Three basic types of
connections allow varying degrees of interaction between the cells: tight junctions, anchoring junctions, and gap
junctions (Figure 4.5).

FIGURE 4.5
Types of Cell Junctions
The three basic types of cell-to-cell junctions are tight junctions, gap junctions, and anchoring
junctions.
At one end of the spectrum is the tight junction, which separates the cells into apical and basal compartments.
When two adjacent epithelial cells form a tight junction, there is no extracellular space between them and the
movement of substances through the extracellular space between the cells is blocked. This enables the epithelia to
act as selective barriers. An anchoring junction includes several types of cell junctions that help stabilize epithelial
tissues. Anchoring junctions are common on the lateral and basal surfaces of cells where they provide strong and
flexible connections. There are three types of anchoring junctions: desmosomes, hemidesmosomes, and adherens.
Desmosomes occur in patches on the membranes of cells. The patches are structural proteins on the inner surface
of the cell’s membrane. The adhesion molecule, cadherin, is embedded in these patches and projects through the
cell membrane to link with the cadherin molecules of adjacent cells. These connections are especially important in
holding cells together. Hemidesmosomes, which look like half a desmosome, link cells to the extracellular matrix,
for example, the basal lamina. While similar in appearance to desmosomes, they include the adhesion proteins
called integrins rather than cadherins. Adherens junctions use either cadherins or integrins depending on whether
they are linking to other cells or matrix. The junctions are characterized by the presence of the contractile protein
actin located on the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane. The actin can connect isolated patches or form a
belt-like structure inside the cell. These junctions influence the shape and folding of the epithelial tissue.
In contrast with the tight and anchoring junctions, a gap junction forms an intercellular passageway between the
membranes of adjacent cells to facilitate the movement of small molecules and ions between the cytoplasm of
adjacent cells. These junctions allow electrical and metabolic coupling of adjacent cells, which coordinates function
in large groups of cells.
Classification of Epithelial Tissues
Epithelial tissues are classified according to the shape of the cells and number of the cell layers formed (Figure 4.6).
Cell shapes can be squamous (flattened and thin), cuboidal (boxy, as wide as it is tall), or columnar (rectangular,
taller than it is wide). Similarly, the number of cell layers in the tissue can be one—where every cell rests on the
basal lamina—which is a simple epithelium, or more than one, which is a stratified epithelium and only the basal
layer of cells rests on the basal lamina. Pseudostratified (pseudo- = “false”) describes tissue with a single layer of
irregularly shaped cells that give the appearance of more than one layer. Transitional describes a form of specialized
stratified epithelium in which the shape of the cells can vary.
FIGURE 4.6
Cells of Epithelial Tissue
Simple epithelial tissue is organized as a single layer of cells and stratified epithelial tissue is
formed by several layers of cells.
Simple Epithelium
The shape of the cells in the single cell layer of simple epithelium reflects the functioning of those cells. The cells in
simple squamous epithelium have the appearance of thin scales. Squamous cell nuclei tend to be flat, horizontal,
and elliptical, mirroring the form of the cell. The endothelium is the epithelial tissue that lines vessels of the
lymphatic and cardiovascular system, and it is made up of a single layer of squamous cells. Simple squamous
epithelium, because of the thinness of the cell, is present where rapid passage of chemical compounds is observed.
The alveoli of lungs where gases diffuse, segments of kidney tubules, and the lining of capillaries are also made of
simple squamous epithelial tissue. The mesothelium is a simple squamous epithelium that forms the surface layer
of the serous membrane that lines body cavities and internal organs. Its primary function is to provide a smooth and
protective surface. Mesothelial cells are squamous epithelial cells that secrete a fluid that lubricates the
mesothelium.
In simple cuboidal epithelium, the nucleus of the box-like cells appears round and is generally located near the
center of the cell. These epithelia are active in the secretion and absorptions of molecules. Simple cuboidal epithelia

are observed in the lining of the kidney tubules and in the ducts of glands.
In simple columnar epithelium, the nucleus of the tall column-like cells tends to be elongated and located in the
basal end of the cells. Like the cuboidal epithelia, this epithelium is active in the absorption and secretion of
molecules. Simple columnar epithelium forms the lining of some sections of the digestive system and parts of the
female reproductive tract. Ciliated columnar epithelium is composed of simple columnar epithelial cells with cilia on
their apical surfaces. These epithelial cells are found in the lining of the fallopian tubes and parts of the respiratory
system, where the beating of the cilia helps remove particulate matter.
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is a type of epithelium that appears to be stratified but instead consists of a
single layer of irregularly shaped and differently sized columnar cells. In pseudostratified epithelium, nuclei of
neighboring cells appear at different levels rather than clustered in the basal end. The arrangement gives the
appearance of stratification; but in fact all the cells are in contact with the basal lamina, although some do not reach
the apical surface. Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is found in the respiratory tract, where some of these cells
have cilia.
Both simple and pseudostratified columnar epithelia are heterogeneous epithelia because they include additional
types of cells interspersed among the epithelial cells. For example, a goblet cell is a mucous-secreting unicellular
“gland” interspersed between the columnar epithelial cells of mucous membranes (Figure 4.7).

FIGURE 4.7
Goblet Cell
(a) In the lining of the small intestine, columnar epithelium cells are interspersed with goblet cells. (b) The
arrows in this micrograph point to the mucous-secreting goblet cells. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/goblet) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Stratified Epithelium
A stratified epithelium consists of several stacked layers of cells. This epithelium protects against physical and
chemical wear and tear. The stratified epithelium is named by the shape of the most apical layer of cells, closest to
the free space. Stratified squamous epithelium is the most common type of stratified epithelium in the human
body. The apical cells are squamous, whereas the basal layer contains either columnar or cuboidal cells. The top
layer may be covered with dead cells filled with keratin. Mammalian skin is an example of this dry, keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium. The lining of the mouth cavity is an example of an unkeratinized, stratified
squamous epithelium. Stratified cuboidal epithelium and stratified columnar epithelium can also be found in
certain glands and ducts, but are uncommon in the human body.
Another kind of stratified epithelium is transitional epithelium, so-called because of the gradual changes in the
shapes of the apical cells as the bladder fills with urine. It is found only in the urinary system, specifically the ureters
and urinary bladder. When the bladder is empty, this epithelium is convoluted and has cuboidal apical cells with
convex, umbrella shaped, apical surfaces. As the bladder fills with urine, this epithelium loses its convolutions and
the apical cells transition from cuboidal to squamous. It appears thicker and more multi-layered when the bladder is
empty, and more stretched out and less stratified when the bladder is full and distended. Figure 4.8 summarizes the
different categories of epithelial cell tissue cells.

FIGURE 4.8
Summary of Epithelial Tissue Cells
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/etissues) to find out more about the anatomy of epithelial tissues. Where in
the body would one find non-keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium?

Glandular Epithelium
A gland is a structure made up of one or more cells modified to synthesize and secrete chemical substances. Most
glands consist of groups of epithelial cells. A gland can be classified as an endocrine gland, a ductless gland that
releases secretions directly into surrounding tissues and fluids (endo- = “inside”), or an exocrine gland whose
secretions leave through a duct that opens directly, or indirectly, to the external environment (exo- = “outside”).
Endocrine Glands
The secretions of endocrine glands are called hormones. Hormones are released into the interstitial fluid, diffused
into the bloodstream, and delivered to targets, in other words, cells that have receptors to bind the hormones. The
endocrine system is part of a major regulatory system coordinating the regulation and integration of body
responses. A few examples of endocrine glands include the anterior pituitary, thymus, adrenal cortex, and gonads.
Exocrine Glands
Exocrine glands release their contents through a duct that leads to the epithelial surface. Mucous, sweat, saliva, and
breast milk are all examples of secretions from exocrine glands. They are all discharged through tubular ducts.
Secretions into the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract, technically outside of the body, are of the exocrine category.
Glandular Structure
Exocrine glands are classified as either unicellular or multicellular. The unicellular glands are scattered single cells,
such as goblet cells, found in the mucous membranes of the small and large intestine.
The multicellular exocrine glands known as serous glands develop from simple epithelium to form a secretory
surface that secretes directly into an inner cavity. These glands line the internal cavities of the abdomen and chest
and release their secretions directly into the cavities. Other multicellular exocrine glands release their contents
through a tubular duct. The duct is single in a simple gland but in compound glands is divided into one or more
branches (Figure 4.9). In tubular glands, the ducts can be straight or coiled, whereas tubes that form pockets are
alveolar (acinar), such as the exocrine portion of the pancreas. Combinations of tubes and pockets are known as
tubuloalveolar (tubuloacinar) compound glands. In a branched gland, a duct is connected to more than one
secretory group of cells.

FIGURE 4.9
Types of Exocrine Glands
Exocrine glands are classified by their structure.
Methods and Types of Secretion
Exocrine glands can be classified by their mode of secretion and the nature of the substances released, as well as by
the structure of the glands and shape of ducts (Figure 4.10). Merocrine secretion is the most common type of
exocrine secretion. The secretions are enclosed in vesicles that move to the apical surface of the cell where the
contents are released by exocytosis. For example, watery mucous containing the glycoprotein mucin, a lubricant
that offers some pathogen protection is a merocrine secretion. The eccrine glands that produce and secrete sweat
are another example.

FIGURE 4.10
Modes of Glandular Secretion
(a) In merocrine secretion, the cell remains intact. (b) In apocrine secretion, the apical
portion of the cell is released, as well. (c) In holocrine secretion, the cell is destroyed as it releases its product and the cell itself becomes
part of the secretion.
Apocrine secretion accumulates near the apical portion of the cell. That portion of the cell and its secretory
contents pinch off from the cell and are released. Apocrine sweat glands in the axillary and genital areas release
fatty secretions that local bacteria break down; this causes body odor. Both merocrine and apocrine glands continue
to produce and secrete their contents with little damage caused to the cell because the nucleus and golgi regions
remain intact after secretion.
In contrast, the process of holocrine secretion involves the rupture and destruction of the entire gland cell. The cell
accumulates its secretory products and releases them only when it bursts. New gland cells differentiate from cells
in the surrounding tissue to replace those lost by secretion. The sebaceous glands that produce the oils on the skin
and hair are holocrine glands/cells (Figure 4.11).

FIGURE 4.11
Sebaceous Glands
These glands secrete oils that lubricate and protect the skin. They are holocrine glands and they are
destroyed after releasing their contents. New glandular cells form to replace the cells that are lost. LM × 400. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Glands are also named after the products they produce. The serous gland produces watery, blood-plasma-like
secretions rich in enzymes such as alpha amylase, whereas the mucous gland releases watery to viscous products
rich in the glycoprotein mucin. Both serous and mucous glands are common in the salivary glands of the mouth.
Mixed exocrine glands contain both serous and mucous glands and release both types of secretions.