4.3 Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify and distinguish between the types of connective tissue: proper, supportive, and fluid
•
Explain the functions of connective tissues
As may be obvious from its name, one of the major functions of connective tissue is to connect tissues and organs.
Unlike epithelial tissue, which is composed of cells closely packed with little or no extracellular space in between,
connective tissue cells are dispersed in a matrix. The matrix usually includes a large amount of extracellular
material produced by the connective tissue cells that are embedded within it. The matrix plays a major role in the
functioning of this tissue. The major component of the matrix is a ground substance often crisscrossed by protein
fibers. This ground substance is usually a fluid, but it can also be mineralized and solid, as in bones. Connective
tissues come in a vast variety of forms, yet they typically have in common three characteristic components: cells,
large amounts of amorphous ground substance, and protein fibers. The amount and structure of each component
correlates with the function of the tissue, from the rigid ground substance in bones supporting the body to the
inclusion of specialized cells; for example, a phagocytic cell that engulfs pathogens and also rids tissue of cellular
debris.
Functions of Connective Tissues
Connective tissues perform many functions in the body, but most importantly, they support and connect other
tissues; from the connective tissue sheath that surrounds muscle cells, to the tendons that attach muscles to bones,
and to the skeleton that supports the positions of the body. Protection is another major function of connective
tissue, in the form of fibrous capsules and bones that protect delicate organs and, of course, the skeletal system.
Specialized cells in connective tissue defend the body from microorganisms that enter the body. Transport of fluid,
nutrients, waste, and chemical messengers is ensured by specialized fluid connective tissues, such as blood and
lymph. Adipose cells store surplus energy in the form of fat and contribute to the thermal insulation of the body.
Embryonic Connective Tissue
All connective tissues derive from the mesodermal layer of the embryo (see Figure 4.3). The first connective tissue
to develop in the embryo is mesenchyme, the stem cell line from which all connective tissues are later derived.
Clusters of mesenchymal cells are scattered throughout adult tissue and supply the cells needed for replacement
and repair after a connective tissue injury. A second type of embryonic connective tissue forms in the umbilical cord,
called mucous connective tissue or Wharton’s jelly. This tissue is no longer present after birth, leaving only
scattered mesenchymal cells throughout the body.
Classification of Connective Tissues
The three broad categories of connective tissue are classified according to the characteristics of their ground
substance and the types of fibers found within the matrix (Table 4.1). Connective tissue proper includes loose
connective tissue and dense connective tissue. Both tissues have a variety of cell types and protein fibers
suspended in a viscous ground substance. Dense connective tissue is reinforced by bundles of fibers that provide
tensile strength, elasticity, and protection. In loose connective tissue, the fibers are loosely organized, leaving large
spaces in between. Supportive connective tissue—bone and cartilage—provide structure and strength to the body
and protect soft tissues. A few distinct cell types and densely packed fibers in a matrix characterize these tissues. In
bone, the matrix is rigid and described as calcified because of the deposited calcium salts. In fluid connective
tissue, in other words, lymph and blood, various specialized cells circulate in a watery fluid containing salts,
nutrients, and dissolved proteins.
Connective Tissue Examples
Connective tissue proper
Supportive connective tissue
Fluid connective tissue
Loose connective tissue
•
Areolar
•
Adipose
•
Reticular
Dense connective tissue
•
Dense regular
•
Elastic
•
Dense-irregular
Cartilage
•
Hyaline
•
Fibrocartilage
•
Elastic
Bone
Blood
Lymph
TABLE 4.1
Connective Tissue Proper
Fibroblasts are present in all connective tissue proper (Figure 4.12). Fibrocytes, adipocytes, and mesenchymal cells
are fixed cells, which means they remain within the connective tissue. Other cells move in and out of the connective
tissue in response to chemical signals. Macrophages, mast cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and phagocytic cells
are found in connective tissue proper but are actually part of the immune system protecting the body.
FIGURE 4.12
Connective Tissue Proper
Fibroblasts produce this fibrous tissue. Connective tissue proper includes the fixed cells
fibrocytes, adipocytes, and mesenchymal cells. LM × 400. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©

2012)
Cell Types
The most abundant cell in connective tissue proper is the fibroblast. Polysaccharides and proteins secreted by
fibroblasts combine with extra-cellular fluids to produce a viscous ground substance that, with embedded fibrous
proteins, forms the extra-cellular matrix. As you might expect, a fibrocyte, a less active form of fibroblast, is the
second most common cell type in connective tissue proper.
Adipocytes are cells that store lipids as droplets that fill most of the cytoplasm. There are two basic types of
adipocytes: white and brown. The brown adipocytes store lipids as many droplets, and have high metabolic activity.
In contrast, white fat adipocytes store lipids as a single large drop and are metabolically less active. Their
effectiveness at storing large amounts of fat is witnessed in obese individuals. The number and type of adipocytes
depends on the tissue and location, and vary among individuals in the population.
The mesenchymal cell is a multipotent adult stem cell. These cells can differentiate into any type of connective
tissue cells needed for repair and healing of damaged tissue.
The macrophage cell is a large cell derived from a monocyte, a type of blood cell, which enters the connective tissue
matrix from the blood vessels. The macrophage cells are an essential component of the immune system, which is
the body’s defense against potential pathogens and degraded host cells. When stimulated, macrophages release
cytokines, small proteins that act as chemical messengers. Cytokines recruit other cells of the immune system to
infected sites and stimulate their activities. Roaming, or free, macrophages move rapidly by amoeboid movement,
engulfing infectious agents and cellular debris. In contrast, fixed macrophages are permanent residents of their
tissues.
The mast cell, found in connective tissue proper, has many cytoplasmic granules. These granules contain the
chemical signals histamine and heparin. When irritated or damaged, mast cells release histamine, an inflammatory
mediator, which causes vasodilation and increased blood flow at a site of injury or infection, along with itching,
swelling, and redness you recognize as an allergic response. Like blood cells, mast cells are derived from
hematopoietic stem cells and are part of the immune system.
Connective Tissue Fibers and Ground Substance
Three main types of fibers are secreted by fibroblasts: collagen fibers, elastic fibers, and reticular fibers. Collagen
fiber is made from fibrous protein subunits linked together to form a long and straight fiber. Collagen fibers, while
flexible, have great tensile strength, resist stretching, and give ligaments and tendons their characteristic resilience
and strength. These fibers hold connective tissues together, even during the movement of the body.
Elastic fiber contains the protein elastin along with lesser amounts of other proteins and glycoproteins. The main
property of elastin is that after being stretched or compressed, it will return to its original shape. Elastic fibers are
prominent in elastic tissues found in skin and the elastic ligaments of the vertebral column.
Reticular fiber is also formed from the same protein subunits as collagen fibers; however, these fibers remain
narrow and are arrayed in a branching network. They are found throughout the body, but are most abundant in the
reticular tissue of soft organs, such as liver and spleen, where they anchor and provide structural support to the
parenchyma (the functional cells, blood vessels, and nerves of the organ).
All of these fiber types are embedded in ground substance. Secreted by fibroblasts, ground substance is made of
polysaccharides, specifically hyaluronic acid, and proteins. These combine to form a proteoglycan with a protein
core and polysaccharide branches. The proteoglycan attracts and traps available moisture forming the clear,
viscous, colorless matrix you now know as ground substance.
Loose Connective Tissue
Loose connective tissue is found between many organs where it acts both to absorb shock and bind tissues
together. It allows water, salts, and various nutrients to diffuse through to adjacent or imbedded cells and tissues.
Adipose tissue consists mostly of fat storage cells, with little extracellular matrix (Figure 4.13). A large number of
capillaries allow rapid storage and mobilization of lipid molecules. White adipose tissue is most abundant. It can
appear yellow and owes its color to carotene and related pigments from plant food. White fat contributes mostly to
lipid storage and can serve as insulation from cold temperatures and mechanical injuries. White adipose tissue can
be found protecting the kidneys and cushioning the back of the eye. Brown adipose tissue is more common in
infants, hence the term “baby fat.” In adults, there is a reduced amount of brown fat and it is found mainly in the
neck and clavicular regions of the body. The many mitochondria in the cytoplasm of brown adipose tissue help
explain its efficiency at metabolizing stored fat. Brown adipose tissue is thermogenic, meaning that as it breaks
down fats, it releases metabolic heat, rather than producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a key molecule used in
metabolism.
FIGURE 4.13
Adipose Tissue
This is a loose connective tissue that consists of fat cells with little extracellular matrix. It stores fat for
energy and provides insulation. LM × 800. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Areolar tissue shows little specialization. It contains all the cell types and fibers previously described and is
distributed in a random, web-like fashion. It fills the spaces between muscle fibers, surrounds blood and lymph
vessels, and supports organs in the abdominal cavity. Areolar tissue underlies most epithelia and represents the
connective tissue component of epithelial membranes, which are described further in a later section.
Reticular tissue is a mesh-like, supportive framework for soft organs such as lymphatic tissue, the spleen, and the
liver (Figure 4.14). Reticular cells produce the reticular fibers that form the network onto which other cells attach. It
derives its name from the Latin reticulus, which means “little net.”
FIGURE 4.14
Reticular Tissue
This is a loose connective tissue made up of a network of reticular fibers that provides a supportive
framework for soft organs. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Dense Connective Tissue
Dense connective tissue contains more collagen fibers than does loose connective tissue. As a consequence, it
displays greater resistance to stretching. There are two major categories of dense connective tissue: regular and
irregular. Dense regular connective tissue fibers are parallel to each other, enhancing tensile strength and resistance
to stretching in the direction of the fiber orientations. Ligaments and tendons are made of dense regular connective
tissue, but in ligaments not all fibers are parallel. Dense regular elastic tissue contains elastin fibers in addition to
collagen fibers, which allows the ligament to return to its original length after stretching. The ligaments in the vocal
folds and between the vertebrae in the vertebral column are elastic.
In dense irregular connective tissue, the direction of fibers is random. This arrangement gives the tissue greater
strength in all directions and less strength in one particular direction. In some tissues, fibers crisscross and form a
mesh. In other tissues, stretching in several directions is achieved by alternating layers where fibers run in the same
orientation in each layer, and it is the layers themselves that are stacked at an angle. The dermis of the skin is an
example of dense irregular connective tissue rich in collagen fibers. Dense irregular elastic tissues give arterial walls
the strength and the ability to regain original shape after stretching (Figure 4.15).
FIGURE 4.15
Dense Connective Tissue
(a) Dense regular connective tissue consists of collagenous fibers packed into parallel bundles.
(b) Dense irregular connective tissue consists of collagenous fibers interwoven into a mesh-like network. From top, LM × 1000, LM × 200.
(Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Connective Tissue: Tendinitis
Your opponent stands ready as you prepare to hit the serve, but you are confident that you will smash the ball
past your opponent. As you toss the ball high in the air, a burning pain shoots across your wrist and you drop the
tennis racket. That dull ache in the wrist that you ignored through the summer is now an unbearable pain. The
game is over for now.
After examining your swollen wrist, the doctor in the emergency room announces that you have developed wrist
tendinitis. She recommends icing the tender area, taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication to ease
the pain and to reduce swelling, and complete rest for a few weeks. She interrupts your protests that you cannot
stop playing. She issues a stern warning about the risk of aggravating the condition and the possibility of surgery.
She consoles you by mentioning that well known tennis players such as Venus and Serena Williams and Rafael
Nadal have also suffered from tendinitis related injuries.
What is tendinitis and how did it happen? Tendinitis is the inflammation of a tendon, the thick band of fibrous
connective tissue that attaches a muscle to a bone. The condition causes pain and tenderness in the area
around a joint. On rare occasions, a sudden serious injury will cause tendinitis. Most often, the condition results
from repetitive motions over time that strain the tendons needed to perform the tasks.
Persons whose jobs and hobbies involve performing the same movements over and over again are often at the
greatest risk of tendinitis. You hear of tennis and golfer’s elbow, jumper's knee, and swimmer’s shoulder. In all
cases, overuse of the joint causes a microtrauma that initiates the inflammatory response. Tendinitis is routinely
diagnosed through a clinical examination. In case of severe pain, X-rays can be examined to rule out the
possibility of a bone injury. Severe cases of tendinitis can even tear loose a tendon. Surgical repair of a tendon is
painful. Connective tissue in the tendon does not have abundant blood supply and heals slowly.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/tendonitis) to learn more about tendonitis, a painful condition caused by
swollen or injured tendons.
Supportive Connective Tissues
Two major forms of supportive connective tissue, cartilage and bone, allow the body to maintain its posture and
protect internal organs.
Cartilage
The distinctive appearance of cartilage is due to polysaccharides called chondroitin sulfates, which bind with ground
substance proteins to form proteoglycans. Embedded within the cartilage matrix are chondrocytes, or cartilage
cells, and the space they occupy are called lacunae (singular = lacuna). A layer of dense irregular connective tissue,
the perichondrium, encapsulates the cartilage. Cartilaginous tissue is avascular, thus all nutrients need to diffuse
through the matrix to reach the chondrocytes. This is a factor contributing to the very slow healing of cartilaginous
tissues.
The three main types of cartilage tissue are hyaline cartilage, fibrocartilage, and elastic cartilage (Figure 4.16).
Hyaline cartilage, the most common type of cartilage in the body, consists of short and dispersed collagen fibers
and contains large amounts of proteoglycans. Under the microscope, tissue samples appear clear. The surface of
hyaline cartilage is smooth. Both strong and flexible, it is found in the rib cage and nose and covers bones where
they meet to form moveable joints. It makes up a template of the embryonic skeleton before bone formation. A
plate of hyaline cartilage at the ends of bone allows continued growth until adulthood. Fibrocartilage is tough
because it has thick bundles of collagen fibers dispersed through its matrix. Menisci in the knee joint and the
intervertebral discs are examples of fibrocartilage. Elastic cartilage contains elastic fibers as well as collagen and
proteoglycans. This tissue gives rigid support as well as elasticity. Tug gently at your ear lobes, and notice that the
lobes return to their initial shape. The external ear contains elastic cartilage.
While older adults are at risk for tendinitis because the elasticity of tendon tissue decreases with age, active
people of all ages can develop tendinitis. Young athletes, dancers, and computer operators; anyone who
performs the same movements constantly is at risk for tendinitis. Although repetitive motions are unavoidable in
many activities and may lead to tendinitis, precautions can be taken that can lessen the probability of
developing tendinitis. For active individuals, stretches before exercising and cross training or changing exercises
are recommended. For the passionate athlete, it may be time to take some lessons to improve technique. All of
the preventive measures aim to increase the strength of the tendon and decrease the stress put on it. With
proper rest and managed care, you will be back on the court to hit that slice-spin serve over the net.

FIGURE 4.16
Types of Cartilage
Cartilage is a connective tissue consisting of collagenous fibers embedded in a firm matrix of
chondroitin sulfates. (a) Hyaline cartilage provides support with some flexibility. The example is from dog tissue. (b) Fibrocartilage provides
some compressibility and can absorb pressure. (c) Elastic cartilage provides firm but elastic support. From top, LM × 300, LM × 1200, LM ×
1016. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Bone
Bone is the hardest connective tissue. It provides protection to internal organs and supports the body. Bone’s rigid
extracellular matrix contains mostly collagen fibers embedded in a mineralized ground substance containing
hydroxyapatite, a form of calcium phosphate. Both components of the matrix, organic and inorganic, contribute to
the unusual properties of bone. Without collagen, bones would be brittle and shatter easily. Without mineral
crystals, bones would flex and provide little support. Osteocytes, bone cells like chondrocytes, are located within
lacunae. The histology of transverse tissue from long bone shows a typical arrangement of osteocytes in concentric
circles around a central canal. Bone is a highly vascularized tissue. Unlike cartilage, bone tissue can recover from
injuries in a relatively short time.
Cancellous bone looks like a sponge under the microscope and contains empty spaces between trabeculae, or
arches of bone proper. It is lighter than compact bone and found in the interior of some bones and at the end of long
bones. Compact bone is solid and has greater structural strength.
Fluid Connective Tissue
Blood and lymph are fluid connective tissues. Cells circulate in a liquid extracellular matrix. The formed elements
circulating in blood are all derived from hematopoietic stem cells located in bone marrow (Figure 4.17).
Erythrocytes, red blood cells, transport oxygen and some carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, are
responsible for defending against potentially harmful microorganisms or molecules. Platelets are cell fragments
involved in blood clotting. Some white blood cells have the ability to cross the endothelial layer that lines blood
vessels and enter adjacent tissues. Nutrients, salts, and wastes are dissolved in the liquid matrix and transported
through the body.
Lymph contains a liquid matrix and white blood cells. Lymphatic capillaries are extremely permeable, allowing larger
molecules and excess fluid from interstitial spaces to enter the lymphatic vessels. Lymph drains into blood vessels,
delivering molecules to the blood that could not otherwise directly enter the bloodstream. In this way, specialized
lymphatic capillaries transport absorbed fats away from the intestine and deliver these molecules to the blood.
FIGURE 4.17
Blood: A Fluid Connective Tissue
Blood is a fluid connective tissue containing erythrocytes and various types of
leukocytes that circulate in a liquid extracellular matrix. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan Webscope (http://openstax.org/l/cardiovascular) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.