7.5 Embryonic Development of the Axial Skeleton
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the two types of embryonic bone development within the skull
•
Describe the development of the vertebral column and thoracic cage
The axial skeleton begins to form during early embryonic development. However, growth, remodeling, and
ossification (bone formation) continue for several decades after birth before the adult skeleton is fully formed.
Knowledge of the developmental processes that give rise to the skeleton is important for understanding the
abnormalities that may arise in skeletal structures.
Development of the Skull
During the third week of embryonic development, a rod-like structure called the notochord develops dorsally along
the length of the embryo. The tissue overlying the notochord enlarges and forms the neural tube, which will give rise
to the brain and spinal cord. By the fourth week, mesoderm tissue located on either side of the notochord thickens
and separates into a repeating series of block-like tissue structures, each of which is called a somite. As the somites
enlarge, each one will split into several parts. The most medial of these parts is called a sclerotome. The
sclerotomes consist of an embryonic tissue called mesenchyme, which will give rise to the fibrous connective
tissues, cartilages, and bones of the body.
The bones of the skull arise from mesenchyme during embryonic development in two different ways. The first
mechanism produces the bones that form the top and sides of the brain case. This involves the local accumulation
of mesenchymal cells at the site of the future bone. These cells then differentiate directly into bone producing cells,
which form the skull bones through the process of intramembranous ossification. As the brain case bones grow in
the fetal skull, they remain separated from each other by large areas of dense connective tissue, each of which is
called a fontanelle (Figure 7.33). The fontanelles are the soft spots on an infant’s head. They are important during
birth because these areas allow the skull to change shape as it squeezes through the birth canal. After birth, the
fontanelles allow for continued growth and expansion of the skull as the brain enlarges. The largest fontanelle is
located on the anterior head, at the junction of the frontal and parietal bones. The fontanelles decrease in size and
disappear by age 2. However, the skull bones remained separated from each other at the sutures, which contain
dense fibrous connective tissue that unites the adjacent bones. The connective tissue of the sutures allows for
continued growth of the skull bones as the brain enlarges during childhood growth.
The second mechanism for bone development in the skull produces the facial bones and floor of the brain case. This
also begins with the localized accumulation of mesenchymal cells. However, these cells differentiate into cartilage
cells, which produce a hyaline cartilage model of the future bone. As this cartilage model grows, it is gradually
converted into bone through the process of endochondral ossification. This is a slow process and the cartilage is not
completely converted to bone until the skull achieves its full adult size.
At birth, the brain case and orbits of the skull are disproportionally large compared to the bones of the jaws and
lower face. This reflects the relative underdevelopment of the maxilla and mandible, which lack teeth, and the small
sizes of the paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity. During early childhood, the mastoid process enlarges, the two halves
of the mandible and frontal bone fuse together to form single bones, and the paranasal sinuses enlarge. The jaws
also expand as the teeth begin to appear. These changes all contribute to the rapid growth and enlargement of the
face during childhood.
FIGURE 7.33
Newborn Skull
The bones of the newborn skull are not fully ossified and are separated by large areas called fontanelles,
which are filled with fibrous connective tissue. The fontanelles allow for continued growth of the skull after birth. At the time of birth, the
facial bones are small and underdeveloped, and the mastoid process has not yet formed.
Development of the Vertebral Column and Thoracic cage
Development of the vertebrae begins with the accumulation of mesenchyme cells from each sclerotome around the
notochord. These cells differentiate into a hyaline cartilage model for each vertebra, which then grow and eventually
ossify into bone through the process of endochondral ossification. As the developing vertebrae grow, the notochord
largely disappears. However, small areas of notochord tissue persist between the adjacent vertebrae and this
contributes to the formation of each intervertebral disc.
The ribs and sternum also develop from mesenchyme. The ribs initially develop as part of the cartilage model for
each vertebra, but in the thorax region, the rib portion separates from the vertebra by the eighth week. The cartilage
model of the rib then ossifies, except for the anterior portion, which remains as the costal cartilage. The sternum
initially forms as paired hyaline cartilage models on either side of the anterior midline, beginning during the fifth
week of development. The cartilage models of the ribs become attached to the lateral sides of the developing
sternum. Eventually, the two halves of the cartilaginous sternum fuse together along the midline and then ossify into
bone. The manubrium and body of the sternum are converted into bone first, with the xiphoid process remaining as
cartilage until late in life.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this video (http://openstax.org/l/skullbones) to review the two processes that give rise to the bones of the skull
and body. What are the two mechanisms by which the bones of the body are formed and which bones are formed by
each mechanism?
