INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 7
Axial Skeleton
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the functions of the skeletal system and define its two major subdivisions
•
Identify the bones and bony structures of the skull, the cranial suture lines, the cranial fossae, and the
openings in the skull
•
Discuss the vertebral column and regional variations in its bony components and curvatures
•
Describe the components of the thoracic cage
•
Discuss the embryonic development of the axial skeleton
The skeletal system forms the rigid internal framework of the body. It consists of the bones,
cartilages, and ligaments. Bones support the weight of the body, allow for body movements, and protect internal
organs. Cartilage provides flexible strength and support for body structures such as the thoracic cage, the external
ear, and the trachea and larynx. At joints of the body, cartilage can also unite adjacent bones or provide cushioning
between them. Ligaments are the strong connective tissue bands that hold the bones at a moveable joint together
and serve to prevent excessive movements of the joint that would result in injury. Providing movement of the
skeleton are the muscles of the body, which are firmly attached to the skeleton via connective tissue structures
called tendons. As muscles contract, they pull on the bones to produce movements of the body. Thus, without a
skeleton, you would not be able to stand, run, or even feed yourself!
Each bone of the body serves a particular function, and therefore bones vary in size, shape, and strength based on
these functions. For example, the bones of the lower back and lower limb are thick and strong to support your body
weight. Similarly, the size of a bony landmark that serves as a muscle attachment site on an individual bone is
related to the strength of this muscle. Muscles can apply very strong pulling forces to the bones of the skeleton. To
resist these forces, bones have enlarged bony landmarks at sites where powerful muscles attach. This means that
not only the size of a bone, but also its shape, is related to its function. For this reason, the identification of bony
landmarks is important during your study of the skeletal system.
Bones are also dynamic organs that can modify their strength and thickness in response to changes in muscle
strength or body weight. Thus, muscle attachment sites on bones will thicken if you begin a workout program that
increases muscle strength. Similarly, the walls of weight-bearing bones will thicken if you gain body weight or begin
pounding the pavement as part of a new running regimen. In contrast, a reduction in muscle strength or body weight
Figure 7.1
Lateral View of the Human Skull
