17.6 The Adrenal Glands
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and structure of the adrenal glands
•
Identify the hormones produced by the adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla, and summarize their target cells
and effects
The adrenal glands are wedges of glandular and neuroendocrine tissue adhering to the top of the kidneys by a
fibrous capsule (Figure 17.17). The adrenal glands have a rich blood supply and experience one of the highest rates
of blood flow in the body. They are served by several arteries branching off the aorta, including the suprarenal and
renal arteries. Blood flows to each adrenal gland at the adrenal cortex and then drains into the adrenal medulla.
Adrenal hormones are released into the circulation via the left and right suprarenal veins.
FIGURE 17.17
Adrenal Glands
Both adrenal glands sit atop the kidneys and are composed of an outer cortex and an inner medulla, all
surrounded by a connective tissue capsule. The cortex can be subdivided into additional zones, all of which produce different types of
hormones. LM × 204. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/adrenal) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
The adrenal gland consists of an outer cortex of glandular tissue and an inner medulla of nervous tissue. The cortex
itself is divided into three zones: the zona glomerulosa, the zona fasciculata, and the zona reticularis. Each region
secretes its own set of hormones.
The adrenal cortex, as a component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, secretes steroid hormones
important for the regulation of the long-term stress response, blood pressure and blood volume, nutrient uptake
and storage, fluid and electrolyte balance, and inflammation. The HPA axis involves the stimulation of hormone
release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary by the hypothalamus. ACTH then stimulates the
adrenal cortex to produce the hormone cortisol. This pathway will be discussed in more detail below.
The adrenal medulla is neuroendocrine tissue composed of postganglionic sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
neurons. It is really an extension of the autonomic nervous system, which regulates homeostasis in the body. The
sympathomedullary (SAM) pathway involves the stimulation of the medulla by impulses from the hypothalamus via
neurons from the thoracic spinal cord. The medulla is stimulated to secrete the amine hormones epinephrine and
norepinephrine.
One of the major functions of the adrenal gland is to respond to stress. Stress can be either physical or psychological
or both. Physical stresses include exposing the body to injury, walking outside in cold and wet conditions without a
coat on, or malnutrition. Psychological stresses include the perception of a physical threat, a fight with a loved one,
or just a bad day at school.
The body responds in different ways to short-term stress and long-term stress following a pattern known as the
general adaptation syndrome (GAS). Stage one of GAS is called the alarm reaction. This is short-term stress, the
fight-or-flight response, mediated by the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla via
the SAM pathway. Their function is to prepare the body for extreme physical exertion. Once this stress is relieved,
the body quickly returns to normal. The section on the adrenal medulla covers this response in more detail.
If the stress is not soon relieved, the body adapts to the stress in the second stage called the stage of resistance. If
a person is starving for example, the body may send signals to the gastrointestinal tract to maximize the absorption
of nutrients from food.
If the stress continues for a longer term however, the body responds with symptoms quite different than the fight-
or-flight response. During the stage of exhaustion, individuals may begin to suffer depression, the suppression of
their immune response, severe fatigue, or even a fatal heart attack. These symptoms are mediated by the hormones
of the adrenal cortex, especially cortisol, released as a result of signals from the HPA axis.
Adrenal hormones also have several non–stress-related functions, including the increase of blood sodium and
glucose levels, which will be described in detail below.
Adrenal Cortex
The adrenal cortex consists of multiple layers of lipid-storing cells that occur in three structurally distinct regions.
Each of these regions produces different hormones.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/adrenalglands) to view an animation describing the location and function of the
adrenal glands. Which hormone produced by the adrenal glands is responsible for the mobilization of energy stores?
Hormones of the Zona Glomerulosa
The most superficial region of the adrenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa, which produces a group of hormones
collectively referred to as mineralocorticoids because of their effect on body minerals, especially sodium and
potassium. These hormones are essential for fluid and electrolyte balance.
Aldosterone is the major mineralocorticoid. It is important in the regulation of the concentration of sodium and
potassium ions in urine, sweat, and saliva. For example, it is released in response to elevated blood K+, low blood
Na+, low blood pressure, or low blood volume. In response, aldosterone increases the excretion of K+ and the
retention of Na+, which in turn increases blood volume and blood pressure. Its secretion is prompted when CRH
from the hypothalamus triggers ACTH release from the anterior pituitary.
Aldosterone is also a key component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in which specialized cells
of the kidneys secrete the enzyme renin in response to low blood volume or low blood pressure. Renin then
catalyzes the conversion of the blood protein angiotensinogen, produced by the liver, to the hormone angiotensin I.
Angiotensin I is converted in the lungs to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). Angiotensin II
has three major functions:
1.
Initiating vasoconstriction of the arterioles, decreasing blood flow
2.
Stimulating kidney tubules to reabsorb NaCl and water, increasing blood volume
3.
Signaling the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, the effects of which further contribute to fluid retention,
restoring blood pressure and blood volume
For individuals with hypertension, or high blood pressure, drugs are available that block the production of
angiotensin II. These drugs, known as ACE inhibitors, block the ACE enzyme from converting angiotensin I to
angiotensin II, thus mitigating the latter’s ability to increase blood pressure.
Hormones of the Zona Fasciculata
The intermediate region of the adrenal cortex is the zona fasciculata, named as such because the cells form small
fascicles (bundles) separated by tiny blood vessels. The cells of the zona fasciculata produce hormones called
glucocorticoids because of their role in glucose metabolism. The most important of these is cortisol, some of which
the liver converts to cortisone. A glucocorticoid produced in much smaller amounts is corticosterone. In response to
long-term stressors, the hypothalamus secretes CRH, which in turn triggers the release of ACTH by the anterior
pituitary. ACTH triggers the release of the glucocorticoids. Their overall effect is to inhibit tissue building while
stimulating the breakdown of stored nutrients to maintain adequate fuel supplies. In conditions of long-term stress,
for example, cortisol promotes the catabolism of glycogen to glucose, the catabolism of stored triglycerides into
fatty acids and glycerol, and the catabolism of muscle proteins into amino acids. These raw materials can then be
used to synthesize additional glucose and ketones for use as body fuels. The hippocampus, which is part of the
temporal lobe of the cerebral cortices and important in memory formation, is highly sensitive to stress levels
because of its many glucocorticoid receptors.
You are probably familiar with prescription and over-the-counter medications containing glucocorticoids, such as
cortisone injections into inflamed joints, prednisone tablets and steroid-based inhalers used to manage severe
asthma, and hydrocortisone creams applied to relieve itchy rashes. These drugs reflect another role of cortisol—the
downregulation of the immune system, which inhibits the inflammatory response.
Hormones of the Zona Reticularis
The deepest region of the adrenal cortex is the zona reticularis, which produces small amounts of a class of steroid
sex hormones called androgens. During puberty and most of adulthood, androgens are produced in the gonads. The
androgens produced in the zona reticularis supplement the gonadal androgens. They are produced in response to
ACTH from the anterior pituitary and are converted in the tissues to testosterone or estrogens. In adult females,
they may contribute to the sex drive, but their function in adult males is not well understood. In post-menopausal
people, as the functions of the ovaries decline, the main source of estrogens becomes the androgens produced by
the zona reticularis.

Adrenal Medulla
As noted earlier, the adrenal cortex releases glucocorticoids in response to long-term stress such as severe illness.
In contrast, the adrenal medulla releases its hormones in response to acute, short-term stress mediated by the
sympathetic nervous system (SNS).
The medullary tissue is composed of unique postganglionic SNS neurons called chromaffin cells, which are large
and irregularly shaped, and produce the neurotransmitters epinephrine (also called adrenaline) and
norepinephrine (or noradrenaline). Epinephrine is produced in greater quantities—approximately a 4 to 1 ratio with
norepinephrine—and is the more powerful hormone. Because the chromaffin cells release epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the systemic circulation, where they travel widely and exert effects on distant cells, they are
considered hormones. Derived from the amino acid tyrosine, they are chemically classified as catecholamines.
The secretion of medullary epinephrine and norepinephrine is controlled by a neural pathway that originates from
the hypothalamus in response to danger or stress (the SAM pathway). Both epinephrine and norepinephrine signal
the liver and skeletal muscle cells to convert glycogen into glucose, resulting in increased blood glucose levels.
These hormones increase the heart rate, pulse, and blood pressure to prepare the body to fight the perceived threat
or flee from it. In addition, the pathway dilates the airways, raising blood oxygen levels. It also prompts vasodilation,
further increasing the oxygenation of important organs such as the lungs, brain, heart, and skeletal muscle. At the
same time, it triggers vasoconstriction to blood vessels serving less essential organs such as the gastrointestinal
tract, kidneys, and skin, and downregulates some components of the immune system. Other effects include a dry
mouth, loss of appetite, pupil dilation, and a loss of peripheral vision. The major hormones of the adrenal glands are
summarized in Table 17.5.

Hormones of the Adrenal Glands
Adrenal gland
Associated hormones
Chemical class
Effect
Adrenal cortex
Aldosterone
Steroid
Increases blood Na+ levels
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol, corticosterone, cortisone
Steroid
Increase blood glucose levels
Adrenal medulla
Epinephrine, norepinephrine
Amine
Stimulate fight-or-flight response
TABLE 17.5

Disorders Involving the Adrenal Glands
Several disorders are caused by the dysregulation of the hormones produced by the adrenal glands. For example,
Cushing’s disease is a disorder characterized by high blood glucose levels and the accumulation of lipid deposits on
the face and neck. It is caused by hypersecretion of cortisol. The most common source of Cushing’s disease is a
pituitary tumor that secretes cortisol or ACTH in abnormally high amounts. Other common signs of Cushing’s
disease include the development of a moon-shaped face, a buffalo hump on the back of the neck, rapid weight gain,
and hair loss. Chronically elevated glucose levels are also associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2
diabetes. In addition to hyperglycemia, chronically elevated glucocorticoids compromise immunity, resistance to
infection, and memory, and can result in rapid weight gain and hair loss.
In contrast, the hyposecretion of corticosteroids can result in Addison’s disease, a rare disorder that causes low
blood glucose levels and low blood sodium levels. The signs and symptoms of Addison’s disease are vague and are
typical of other disorders as well, making diagnosis difficult. They may include general weakness, abdominal pain,
weight loss, nausea, vomiting, sweating, and cravings for salty food.
