10.6 Exercise and Muscle Performance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe hypertrophy and atrophy
•
Explain how resistance exercise builds muscle
•
Explain how performance-enhancing substances affect muscle
Physical training alters the appearance of skeletal muscles and can produce changes in muscle performance.
Conversely, a lack of use can result in decreased performance and muscle appearance. Although muscle cells can
change in size, new cells are not formed when muscles grow. Instead, structural proteins are added to muscle fibers
in a process called hypertrophy, so cell diameter increases. The reverse, when structural proteins are lost and
muscle mass decreases, is called atrophy. Age-related muscle atrophy is called sarcopenia. Cellular components of
muscles can also undergo changes in response to changes in muscle use.
Endurance Exercise
Slow fibers are predominantly used in endurance exercises that require little force but involve numerous repetitions.
The aerobic metabolism used by slow-twitch fibers allows them to maintain contractions over long periods.
Endurance training modifies these slow fibers to make them even more efficient by producing more mitochondria to
enable more aerobic metabolism and more ATP production. Endurance exercise can also increase the amount of
myoglobin in a cell, as increased aerobic respiration increases the need for oxygen. Myoglobin is found in the
sarcoplasm and acts as an oxygen storage supply for the mitochondria.
The training can trigger the formation of more extensive capillary networks around the fiber, a process called
angiogenesis, to supply oxygen and remove metabolic waste. To allow these capillary networks to supply the deep
portions of the muscle, muscle mass does not greatly increase in order to maintain a smaller area for the diffusion of
nutrients and gases. All of these cellular changes result in the ability to sustain low levels of muscle contractions for
greater periods without fatiguing.
The proportion of SO muscle fibers in muscle determines the suitability of that muscle for endurance, and may
benefit those participating in endurance activities. Postural muscles have a large number of SO fibers and relatively
few FO and FG fibers, to keep the back straight (Figure 10.18). Endurance athletes, like marathon-runners also
would benefit from a larger proportion of SO fibers, but it is unclear if the most-successful marathoners are those
with naturally high numbers of SO fibers, or whether the most successful marathon runners develop high numbers
of SO fibers with repetitive training. Endurance training can result in overuse injuries such as stress fractures and
joint and tendon inflammation.
FIGURE 10.18
Marathoners
Long-distance runners have a large number of SO fibers and relatively few FO and FG fibers. (credit:
“Tseo2”/Wikimedia Commons)
Resistance Exercise
Resistance exercises, as opposed to endurance exercise, require large amounts of FG fibers to produce short,
powerful movements that are not repeated over long periods. The high rates of ATP hydrolysis and cross-bridge
formation in FG fibers result in powerful muscle contractions. Muscles used for power have a higher ratio of FG to
SO/FO fibers, and trained athletes possess even higher levels of FG fibers in their muscles. Resistance exercise
affects muscles by increasing the formation of myofibrils, thereby increasing the thickness of muscle fibers. This
added structure causes hypertrophy, or the enlargement of muscles, exemplified by the large skeletal muscles seen
in body builders and other athletes (Figure 10.19). Because this muscular enlargement is achieved by the addition
of structural proteins, athletes trying to build muscle mass often ingest large amounts of protein.

FIGURE 10.19
Hypertrophy
Body builders have a large number of FG fibers and relatively few FO and SO fibers. (credit: Lin Mei/flickr)
Except for the hypertrophy that follows an increase in the number of sarcomeres and myofibrils in a skeletal muscle,
the cellular changes observed during endurance training do not usually occur with resistance training. There is
usually no significant increase in mitochondria or capillary density. However, resistance training does increase the
development of connective tissue, which adds to the overall mass of the muscle and helps to contain muscles as
they produce increasingly powerful contractions. Tendons also become stronger to prevent tendon damage, as the
force produced by muscles is transferred to tendons that attach the muscle to bone.
For effective strength training, the intensity of the exercise must continually be increased. For instance, continued
weight lifting without increasing the weight of the load does not increase muscle size. To produce ever-greater
results, the weights lifted must become increasingly heavier, making it more difficult for muscles to move the load.
The muscle then adapts to this heavier load, and an even heavier load must be used if even greater muscle mass is
desired.
If done improperly, resistance training can lead to overuse injuries of the muscle, tendon, or bone. These injuries
can occur if the load is too heavy or if the muscles are not given sufficient time between workouts to recover or if
joints are not aligned properly during the exercises. Cellular damage to muscle fibers that occurs after intense
exercise includes damage to the sarcolemma and myofibrils. This muscle damage contributes to the feeling of
soreness after strenuous exercise, but muscles gain mass as this damage is repaired, and additional structural
proteins are added to replace the damaged ones. Overworking skeletal muscles can also lead to tendon damage and
even skeletal damage if the load is too great for the muscles to bear.
Performance-Enhancing Substances
Some athletes attempt to boost their performance by using various agents that may enhance muscle performance.
Anabolic steroids are one of the more widely known agents used to boost muscle mass and increase power output.
Anabolic steroids are a form of testosterone, a male sex hormone that stimulates muscle formation, leading to
increased muscle mass.
Endurance athletes may also try to boost the availability of oxygen to muscles to increase aerobic respiration by
using substances such as erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone normally produced in the kidneys, which triggers the
production of red blood cells. The extra oxygen carried by these blood cells can then be used by muscles for aerobic
respiration. Human growth hormone (hGH) is another supplement, and although it can facilitate building muscle
mass, its main role is to promote the healing of muscle and other tissues after strenuous exercise. Increased hGH
may allow for faster recovery after muscle damage, reducing the rest required after exercise, and allowing for more
sustained high-level performance.
Although performance-enhancing substances often do improve performance, most are banned by governing bodies
in sports and are illegal for nonmedical purposes. Their use to enhance performance raises ethical issues of
cheating because they give users an unfair advantage over nonusers. A greater concern, however, is that their use
carries serious health risks. The side effects of these substances are often significant, nonreversible, and in some
cases fatal. The physiological strain caused by these substances is often greater than what the body can handle,
leading to effects that are unpredictable and dangerous. Anabolic steroid use has been linked to infertility,
aggressive behavior, cardiovascular disease, and brain cancer.
Similarly, some athletes have used creatine to increase power output. Creatine phosphate provides quick bursts of
ATP to muscles in the initial stages of contraction. Increasing the amount of creatine available to cells is thought to
produce more ATP and therefore increase explosive power output, although its effectiveness as a supplement has
been questioned.