25.2 Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra, as well as their location, structure, histology, and function
•
Compare and contrast male and female urethras
•
Describe the micturition reflex
•
Describe voluntary and involuntary neural control of micturition
Rather than start with urine formation, this section will start with urine excretion. Urine is a fluid of variable
composition that requires specialized structures to remove it from the body safely and efficiently. Blood is filtered,
and the filtrate is transformed into urine at a relatively constant rate throughout the day. This processed liquid is
stored until a convenient time for excretion. All structures involved in the transport and storage of the urine are large
enough to be visible to the naked eye. This transport and storage system not only stores the waste, but it protects
the tissues from damage due to the wide range of pH and osmolarity of the urine, prevents infection by foreign
organisms, and for the male, provides reproductive functions.

Urethra
The urethra transports urine from the bladder to the outside of the body for disposal. The urethra is the only
urologic organ that shows any significant anatomic difference between males and females; all other urine transport
structures are identical (Figure 25.3).

FIGURE 25.3
Female and Male Urethras
The urethra transports urine from the bladder to the outside of the body. This image shows
(a) a female urethra and (b) a male urethra.

The urethra in both males and females begins inferior and central to the two ureteral openings forming the three
points of a triangular-shaped area at the base of the bladder called the trigone (Greek tri- = “triangle” and the root
of the word “trigonometry”). The urethra tracks posterior and inferior to the pubic symphysis (see Figure 25.3a). In
both males and females, the proximal urethra is lined by transitional epithelium, whereas the terminal portion is a
nonkeratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. In the male, pseudostratified columnar epithelium lines the urethra
between these two cell types. Voiding is regulated by an involuntary autonomic nervous system-controlled internal
urinary sphincter, consisting of smooth muscle and voluntary skeletal muscle that forms the external urinary
sphincter below it.

Female Urethra
The external urethral orifice is embedded in the anterior vaginal wall inferior to the clitoris, superior to the vaginal
opening (introitus), and medial to the labia minora. Its short length, about 4 cm, is less of a barrier to fecal bacteria
than the longer male urethra and the best explanation for the greater incidence of UTI in females. Voluntary control
of the external urethral sphincter is a function of the pudendal nerve. It arises in the sacral region of the spinal cord,
traveling via the S2–S4 nerves of the sacral plexus.

Male Urethra
The male urethra passes through the prostate gland immediately inferior to the bladder before passing below the
pubic symphysis (see Figure 25.3b). The length of the male urethra varies between people but averages 20 cm in
length. It is divided into four regions: the preprostatic urethra, the prostatic urethra, the membranous urethra, and
the spongy or penile urethra. The preprostatic urethra is very short and incorporated into the bladder wall. The
prostatic urethra passes through the prostate gland. During sexual intercourse, it receives sperm via the ejaculatory
ducts and secretions from the seminal vesicles. Paired Cowper’s glands (bulbourethral glands) produce and secrete
mucus into the urethra to buffer urethral pH during sexual stimulation. The mucus neutralizes the usually acidic
environment and lubricates the urethra, decreasing the resistance to ejaculation. The membranous urethra passes
through the deep muscles of the perineum, where it is invested by the overlying urethral sphincters. The spongy
urethra exits at the tip (external urethral orifice) of the penis after passing through the corpus spongiosum. Mucous
glands are found along much of the length of the urethra and protect the urethra from extremes of urine pH.
Innervation is the same in both males and females.

Bladder
The urinary bladder collects urine from both ureters (Figure 25.4). The bladder lies anterior to the uterus in females,
posterior to the pubic bone and anterior to the rectum. During late pregnancy, its capacity is reduced due to
compression by the enlarging uterus, resulting in increased frequency of urination. In males, the anatomy is similar,
minus the uterus, and with the addition of the prostate inferior to the bladder. The bladder is a retroperitoneal
organ whose "dome" distends superiorly when the bladder is filling with urine.

FIGURE 25.4
Bladder
(a) Anterior cross section of the bladder. (b) The detrusor muscle of the bladder (source: monkey tissue) LM ×
448. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/bladderMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
The bladder is a highly distensible organ comprised of irregular crisscrossing bands of smooth muscle collectively
called the detrusor muscle. The interior surface is made of transitional cellular epithelium that is structurally suited
for the large volume fluctuations of the bladder. When empty, it resembles columnar epithelia, but when stretched,
it “transitions” (hence the name) to a squamous appearance (see Figure 25.4). Volumes in adults can range from
nearly zero to 500–600 mL.
The detrusor muscle contracts with significant force in the young. The bladder’s strength diminishes with age, but
voluntary contractions of abdominal skeletal muscles can increase intra-abdominal pressure to promote more
forceful bladder emptying. Such voluntary contraction is also used in forceful defecation and childbirth.

Micturition Reflex
Micturition is a less-often used, but proper term for urination or voiding. It results from an interplay of involuntary
and voluntary actions by the internal and external urethral sphincters. When bladder volume reaches about 150 mL,
an urge to void is sensed but is easily overridden. Voluntary control of urination relies on consciously preventing
relaxation of the external urethral sphincter to maintain urinary continence. As the bladder fills, subsequent urges
become harder to ignore. Ultimately, voluntary constraint fails with resulting incontinence, which will occur as
bladder volume approaches 300 to 400 mL.
Normal micturition is a result of stretch receptors in the bladder wall that transmit nerve impulses to the sacral
region of the spinal cord to generate a spinal reflex. The resulting parasympathetic neural outflow causes
contraction of the detrusor muscle and relaxation of the involuntary internal urethral sphincter. At the same time,
the spinal cord inhibits somatic motor neurons, resulting in the relaxation of the skeletal muscle of the external
urethral sphincter. The micturition reflex is active in infants but with maturity, children learn to override the reflex by
asserting external sphincter control, thereby delaying voiding (potty training). This reflex may be preserved even in
the face of spinal cord injury that results in paraplegia or quadriplegia. However, relaxation of the external sphincter
may not be possible in all cases, and therefore, periodic catheterization may be necessary for bladder emptying.
Nerves involved in the control of urination include the hypogastric, pelvic, and pudendal (Figure 25.5). Voluntary
micturition requires an intact spinal cord and functional pudendal nerve arising from the sacral micturition center.
Since the external urinary sphincter is voluntary skeletal muscle, actions by cholinergic neurons maintain
contraction (and thereby continence) during filling of the bladder. At the same time, sympathetic nervous activity via
the hypogastric nerves suppresses contraction of the detrusor muscle. With further bladder stretch, afferent signals
traveling over sacral pelvic nerves activate parasympathetic neurons. This activates efferent neurons to release
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junctions, producing detrusor contraction and bladder emptying.

FIGURE 25.5
Nerves Innervating the Urinary System

Ureters
The kidneys and ureters are completely retroperitoneal, and the bladder has a peritoneal covering only over the
dome. As urine is formed, it drains into the calyces of the kidney, which merge to form the funnel-shaped renal
pelvis in the hilum of each kidney. The renal pelvis narrows to become the ureter of each kidney. As urine passes
through the ureter, it does not passively drain into the bladder but rather is propelled by waves of peristalsis. As the
ureters enter the pelvis, they sweep laterally, hugging the pelvic walls. As they approach the bladder, they turn
medially and pierce the bladder wall obliquely. This is important because it creates a one-way valve (a physiological
sphincter rather than an anatomical sphincter) that allows urine into the bladder but prevents reflux of urine from
the bladder back into the ureter. Children born lacking this oblique course of the ureter through the bladder wall are
susceptible to “vesicoureteral reflux,” which dramatically increases their risk of serious UTI. Pregnancy also
increases the likelihood of reflux and UTI.
The ureters are approximately 30 cm long. The inner mucosa is lined with transitional epithelium (Figure 25.6) and
scattered goblet cells that secrete protective mucus. The muscular layer of the ureter consists of longitudinal and
circular smooth muscles that create the peristaltic contractions to move the urine into the bladder without the aid of
gravity. Finally, a loose adventitial layer composed of collagen and fat anchors the ureters between the parietal
peritoneum and the posterior abdominal wall.

FIGURE 25.6
Ureter
Peristaltic contractions help to move urine through the lumen with contributions from fluid pressure and gravity.
LM × 128. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
