15.2 Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare the structure of somatic and autonomic reflex arcs
•
Explain the differences in sympathetic and parasympathetic reflexes
•
Differentiate between short and long reflexes
•
Determine the effect of the autonomic nervous system on the regulation of the various organ systems on the
basis of the signaling molecules involved
•
Describe the effects of drugs that affect autonomic function
The autonomic nervous system regulates organ systems through circuits that resemble the reflexes described in the
somatic nervous system. The main difference between the somatic and autonomic systems is in what target tissues
are effectors. Somatic responses are solely based on skeletal muscle contraction. The autonomic system, however,
targets cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as glandular tissue. Whereas the basic circuit is a reflex arc, there are
differences in the structure of those reflexes for the somatic and autonomic systems.
The Structure of Reflexes
One difference between a somatic reflex, such as the withdrawal reflex, and a visceral reflex, which is an
autonomic reflex, is in the efferent branch. The output of a somatic reflex is the lower motor neuron in the ventral
horn of the spinal cord that projects directly to a skeletal muscle to cause its contraction. The output of a visceral
reflex is a two-step pathway starting with the preganglionic fiber emerging from a lateral horn neuron in the spinal
cord, or a cranial nucleus neuron in the brain stem, to a ganglion—followed by the postganglionic fiber projecting to a
target effector. The other part of a reflex, the afferent branch, is often the same between the two systems. Sensory
neurons receiving input from the periphery—with cell bodies in the sensory ganglia, either of a cranial nerve or a
dorsal root ganglion adjacent to the spinal cord—project into the CNS to initiate the reflex (Figure 15.6). The Latin
root “effere” means “to carry.” Adding the prefix “ef-” suggests the meaning “to carry away,” whereas adding the
prefix “af-” suggests “to carry toward or inward.”

FIGURE 15.6
Comparison of Somatic and Visceral Reflexes
The afferent inputs to somatic and visceral reflexes are essentially the
same, whereas the efferent branches are different. Somatic reflexes, for instance, involve a direct connection from the ventral horn of the
spinal cord to the skeletal muscle. Visceral reflexes involve a projection from the central neuron to a ganglion, followed by a second
projection from the ganglion to the target effector.

Afferent Branch
The afferent branch of a reflex arc does differ between somatic and visceral reflexes in some instances. Many of the
inputs to visceral reflexes are from special or somatic senses, but particular senses are associated with the viscera
that are not part of the conscious perception of the environment through the somatic nervous system. For example,
there is a specific type of mechanoreceptor, called a baroreceptor, in the walls of the aorta and carotid sinuses that
senses the stretch of those organs when blood volume or pressure increases. You do not have a conscious
perception of having high blood pressure, but that is an important afferent branch of the cardiovascular and,
particularly, vasomotor reflexes. The sensory neuron is essentially the same as any other general sensory neuron.
The baroreceptor apparatus is part of the ending of a unipolar neuron that has a cell body in a sensory ganglion. The
baroreceptors from the carotid arteries have axons in the glossopharyngeal nerve, and those from the aorta have
axons in the vagus nerve.
Though visceral senses are not primarily a part of conscious perception, those sensations sometimes make it to
conscious awareness. If a visceral sense is strong enough, it will be perceived. The sensory homunculus—the
representation of the body in the primary somatosensory cortex—only has a small region allotted for the perception
of internal stimuli. If you swallow a large bolus of food, for instance, you will probably feel the lump of that food as it
pushes through your esophagus, or even if your stomach is distended after a large meal. If you inhale especially cold
air, you can feel it as it enters your larynx and trachea. These sensations are not the same as feeling high blood
pressure or blood sugar levels.
When particularly strong visceral sensations rise to the level of conscious perception, the sensations are often felt in
unexpected places. For example, strong visceral sensations of the heart will be felt as pain in the left shoulder and
left arm. This irregular pattern of projection of conscious perception of visceral sensations is called referred pain.
Depending on the organ system affected, the referred pain will project to different areas of the body (Figure 15.7).
The location of referred pain is not random, but a definitive explanation of the mechanism has not been established.
The most broadly accepted theory for this phenomenon is that the visceral sensory fibers enter into the same level
of the spinal cord as the somatosensory fibers of the referred pain location. By this explanation, the visceral sensory
fibers from the mediastinal region, where the heart is located, would enter the spinal cord at the same level as the
spinal nerves from the shoulder and arm, so the brain misinterprets the sensations from the mediastinal region as
being from the axillary and brachial regions. Projections from the medial and inferior divisions of the cervical ganglia
do enter the spinal cord at the middle to lower cervical levels, which is where the somatosensory fibers enter.
FIGURE 15.7
Referred Pain Chart
Conscious perception of visceral sensations map to specific regions of the body, as shown in this
chart. Some sensations are felt locally, whereas others are perceived as affecting areas that are quite distant from the involved organ.
Disorders of the...
Nervous System: Kehr’s Sign
Kehr’s sign is the presentation of pain in the left shoulder, chest, and neck regions following rupture of the
spleen. The spleen is in the upper-left abdominopelvic quadrant, but the pain is more in the shoulder and neck.
How can this be? The sympathetic fibers connected to the spleen are from the celiac ganglion, which would be
from the mid-thoracic to lower thoracic region whereas parasympathetic fibers are found in the vagus nerve,
which connects in the medulla of the brain stem. However, the neck and shoulder would connect to the spinal
cord at the mid-cervical level of the spinal cord. These connections do not fit with the expected correspondence
of visceral and somatosensory fibers entering at the same level of the spinal cord.
The incorrect assumption would be that the visceral sensations are coming from the spleen directly. In fact, the
visceral fibers are coming from the diaphragm. The nerve connecting to the diaphragm takes a special route. The
phrenic nerve is connected to the spinal cord at cervical levels 3 to 5. The motor fibers that make up this nerve
are responsible for the muscle contractions that drive ventilation. These fibers have left the spinal cord to enter
the phrenic nerve, meaning that spinal cord damage below the mid-cervical level is not fatal by making
ventilation impossible. Therefore, the visceral fibers from the diaphragm enter the spinal cord at the same level
as the somatosensory fibers from the neck and shoulder.
The diaphragm plays a role in Kehr’s sign because the spleen is just inferior to the diaphragm in the upper-left
quadrant of the abdominopelvic cavity. When the spleen ruptures, blood spills into this region. The accumulating
hemorrhage then puts pressure on the diaphragm. The visceral sensation is actually in the diaphragm, so the
referred pain is in a region of the body that corresponds to the diaphragm, not the spleen.

Efferent Branch
The efferent branch of the visceral reflex arc begins with the projection from the central neuron along the
preganglionic fiber. This fiber then makes a synapse on the ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector.
The effector organs that are the targets of the autonomic system range from the iris and ciliary body of the eye to the
urinary bladder and reproductive organs. The thoracolumbar output, through the various sympathetic ganglia,
reaches all of these organs. The cranial component of the parasympathetic system projects from the eye to part of
the intestines. The sacral component picks up with the majority of the large intestine and the pelvic organs of the
urinary and reproductive systems.

Short and Long Reflexes
Somatic reflexes involve sensory neurons that connect sensory receptors to the CNS and motor neurons that project
back out to the skeletal muscles. Visceral reflexes that involve the thoracolumbar or craniosacral systems share
similar connections. However, there are reflexes that do not need to involve any CNS components. A long reflex has
afferent branches that enter the spinal cord or brain and involve the efferent branches, as previously explained. A
short reflex is completely peripheral and only involves the local integration of sensory input with motor output
(Figure 15.8).

FIGURE 15.8
Short and Long Reflexes
Sensory input can stimulate either a short or a long reflex. A sensory neuron can project to the
CNS or to an autonomic ganglion. The short reflex involves the direct stimulation of a postganglionic fiber by the sensory neuron, whereas
the long reflex involves integration in the spinal cord or brain.
The difference between short and long reflexes is in the involvement of the CNS. Somatic reflexes always involve the
CNS, even in a monosynaptic reflex in which the sensory neuron directly activates the motor neuron. That synapse is
in the spinal cord or brain stem, so it has to involve the CNS. However, in the autonomic system there is the
possibility that the CNS is not involved. Because the efferent branch of a visceral reflex involves two neurons—the
central neuron and the ganglionic neuron—a “short circuit” can be possible. If a sensory neuron projects directly to
the ganglionic neuron and causes it to activate the effector target, then the CNS is not involved.
A division of the nervous system that is related to the autonomic nervous system is the enteric nervous system. The
word enteric refers to the digestive organs, so this represents the nervous tissue that is part of the digestive system.
There are a few myenteric plexuses in which the nervous tissue in the wall of the digestive tract organs can directly
influence digestive function. If stretch receptors in the stomach are activated by the filling and distension of the
stomach, a short reflex will directly activate the smooth muscle fibers of the stomach wall to increase motility to
digest the excessive food in the stomach. No CNS involvement is needed because the stretch receptor is directly
activating a neuron in the wall of the stomach that causes the smooth muscle to contract. That neuron, connected to
the smooth muscle, is a postganglionic parasympathetic neuron that can be controlled by a fiber found in the vagus
nerve.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/strokespell) to learn about a teenager who experiences a series of spells that
suggest a stroke. He undergoes endless tests and seeks input from multiple doctors. In the end, one expert, one
question, and a simple blood pressure cuff answers the question. Why would the heart have to beat faster when the
teenager changes his body position from lying down to sitting, and then to standing?
Balance in Competing Autonomic Reflex Arcs
The autonomic nervous system is important for homeostasis because its two divisions compete at the target
effector. The balance of homeostasis is attributable to the competing inputs from the sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions (dual innervation). At the level of the target effector, the signal of which system is sending
the message is strictly chemical. A signaling molecule binds to a receptor that causes changes in the target cell,
which in turn causes the tissue or organ to respond to the changing conditions of the body.
Competing Neurotransmitters
The postganglionic fibers of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions both release neurotransmitters that
bind to receptors on their targets. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, with a minor exception,
whereas postganglionic parasympathetic fibers release ACh. For any given target, the difference in which division of
the autonomic nervous system is exerting control is just in what chemical binds to its receptors. The target cells will
have adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. If norepinephrine is released, it will bind to the adrenergic receptors
present on the target cell, and if ACh is released, it will bind to the muscarinic receptors on the target cell.
In the sympathetic system, there are exceptions to this pattern of dual innervation. The postganglionic sympathetic
fibers that contact the blood vessels within skeletal muscle and that contact sweat glands do not release
norepinephrine, they release ACh. This does not create any problem because there is no parasympathetic input to
the sweat glands. Sweat glands have muscarinic receptors and produce and secrete sweat in response to the
presence of ACh.
At most of the other targets of the autonomic system, the effector response is based on which neurotransmitter is
released and what receptor is present. For example, regions of the heart that establish heart rate are contacted by
postganglionic fibers from both systems. If norepinephrine is released onto those cells, it binds to an adrenergic
receptor that causes the cells to depolarize faster, and the heart rate increases. If ACh is released onto those cells, it
binds to a muscarinic receptor that causes the cells to hyperpolarize so that they cannot reach threshold as easily,
and the heart rate slows. Without this parasympathetic input, the heart would work at a rate of approximately 100
beats per minute (bpm). The sympathetic system speeds that up, as it would during exercise, to 120–140 bpm, for
example. The parasympathetic system slows it down to the resting heart rate of 60–80 bpm.
Another example is in the control of pupillary size (Figure 15.9). The afferent branch responds to light hitting the
retina. Photoreceptors are activated, and the signal is transferred to the retinal ganglion cells that send an action
potential along the optic nerve into the diencephalon. If light levels are low, the sympathetic system sends a signal
out through the upper thoracic spinal cord to the superior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic chain. The
postganglionic fiber then projects to the iris, where it releases norepinephrine onto the radial fibers of the iris (a
smooth muscle). When those fibers contract, the pupil dilates—increasing the amount of light hitting the retina. If
light levels are too high, the parasympathetic system sends a signal out from the Edinger–Westphal nucleus through
the oculomotor nerve. This fiber synapses in the ciliary ganglion in the posterior orbit. The postganglionic fiber then
projects to the iris, where it releases ACh onto the circular fibers of the iris—another smooth muscle. When those
fibers contract, the pupil constricts to limit the amount of light hitting the retina.

FIGURE 15.9
Autonomic Control of Pupillary Size
Activation of the pupillary reflex comes from the amount of light activating the
retinal ganglion cells, as sent along the optic nerve. The output of the sympathetic system projects through the superior cervical ganglion,
whereas the parasympathetic system originates out of the midbrain and projects through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion,
which then projects to the iris. The postganglionic fibers of either division release neurotransmitters onto the smooth muscles of the iris to
cause changes in the pupillary size. Norepinephrine results in dilation and ACh results in constriction.
In this example, the autonomic system is controlling how much light hits the retina. It is a homeostatic reflex
mechanism that keeps the activation of photoreceptors within certain limits. In the context of avoiding a threat like
the lioness on the savannah, the sympathetic response for fight or flight will increase pupillary diameter so that
more light hits the retina and more visual information is available for running away. Likewise, the parasympathetic
response of rest reduces the amount of light reaching the retina, allowing the photoreceptors to cycle through
bleaching and be regenerated for further visual perception; this is what the homeostatic process is attempting to
maintain.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/pupillary) to learn about the pupillary reflexes. The pupillary light reflex
involves sensory input through the optic nerve and motor response through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary
ganglion, which projects to the circular fibers of the iris. As shown in this short animation, pupils will constrict to
limit the amount of light falling on the retina under bright lighting conditions. What constitutes the afferent and
efferent branches of the competing reflex (dilation)?

Autonomic Tone
Organ systems are balanced between the input from the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. When
something upsets that balance, the homeostatic mechanisms strive to return it to its regular state. For each organ
system, there may be more of a sympathetic or parasympathetic tendency to the resting state, which is known as
the autonomic tone of the system. For example, the heart rate was described above. Because the resting heart rate
is the result of the parasympathetic system slowing the heart down from its intrinsic rate of 100 bpm, the heart can
be said to be in parasympathetic tone.
In a similar fashion, another aspect of the cardiovascular system is primarily under sympathetic control. Blood
pressure is partially determined by the contraction of smooth muscle in the walls of blood vessels. These tissues
have adrenergic receptors that respond to the release of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic fibers by
constricting and increasing blood pressure. The hormones released from the adrenal medulla—epinephrine and
norepinephrine—will also bind to these receptors. Those hormones travel through the bloodstream where they can
easily interact with the receptors in the vessel walls. The parasympathetic system has no significant input to the
systemic blood vessels, so the sympathetic system determines their tone.
There are a limited number of blood vessels that respond to sympathetic input in a different fashion. Blood vessels
in skeletal muscle, particularly those in the lower limbs, are more likely to dilate. It does not have an overall effect
on blood pressure to alter the tone of the vessels, but rather allows for blood flow to increase for those skeletal
muscles that will be active in the fight-or-flight response. The blood vessels that have a parasympathetic projection
are limited to those in the erectile tissue of the reproductive organs. Acetylcholine released by these postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers cause the vessels to dilate, leading to the engorgement of the erectile tissue.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Orthostatic Hypotension
Have you ever stood up quickly and felt dizzy for a moment? This is because, for one reason or another, blood is not
getting to your brain so it is briefly deprived of oxygen. When you change position from sitting or lying down to
standing, your cardiovascular system has to adjust for a new challenge, keeping blood pumping up into the head
while gravity is pulling more and more blood down into the legs.
The reason for this is a sympathetic reflex that maintains the output of the heart in response to postural change.
When a person stands up, proprioceptors indicate that the body is changing position. A signal goes to the CNS,
which then sends a signal to the upper thoracic spinal cord neurons of the sympathetic division. The sympathetic
system then causes the heart to beat faster and the blood vessels to constrict. Both changes will make it possible
for the cardiovascular system to maintain the rate of blood delivery to the brain. Blood is being pumped superiorly
through the internal branch of the carotid arteries into the brain, against the force of gravity. Gravity is not increasing
while standing, but blood is more likely to flow down into the legs as they are extended for standing. This
sympathetic reflex keeps the brain well oxygenated so that cognitive and other neural processes are not interrupted.
Sometimes this does not work properly. If the sympathetic system cannot increase cardiac output, then blood
pressure into the brain will decrease, and a brief neurological loss can be felt. This can be brief, as a slight
“wooziness” when standing up too quickly, or a loss of balance and neurological impairment for a period of time.
The name for this is orthostatic hypotension, which means that blood pressure goes below the homeostatic set
point when standing. It can be the result of standing up faster than the reflex can occur, which may be referred to as
a benign “head rush,” or it may be the result of an underlying cause.
There are two basic reasons that orthostatic hypotension can occur. First, blood volume is too low and the
sympathetic reflex is not effective. This hypovolemia may be the result of dehydration or medications that affect
fluid balance, such as diuretics or vasodilators. Both of these medications are meant to lower blood pressure, which
may be necessary in the case of systemic hypertension, and regulation of the medications may alleviate the
problem. Sometimes increasing fluid intake or water retention through salt intake can improve the situation.
The second underlying cause of orthostatic hypotension is autonomic failure. There are several disorders that result
in compromised sympathetic functions. The disorders range from diabetes to multiple system atrophy (a loss of
control over many systems in the body), and addressing the underlying condition can improve the hypotension. For
example, with diabetes, peripheral nerve damage can occur, which would affect the postganglionic sympathetic
fibers. Getting blood glucose levels under control can improve neurological deficits associated with diabetes.
