10.5 Types of Muscle Fibers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the types of skeletal muscle fibers
•
Explain fast and slow muscle fibers
Two criteria to consider when classifying the types of muscle fibers are how fast some fibers contract relative to
others, and how fibers produce ATP. Using these criteria, there are three main types of skeletal muscle fibers. Slow
oxidative (SO) fibers contract relatively slowly and use aerobic respiration (oxygen and glucose) to produce ATP.
Fast oxidative (FO) fibers have fast contractions and primarily use aerobic respiration, but because they may switch
to anaerobic respiration (glycolysis), can fatigue more quickly than SO fibers. Lastly, fast glycolytic (FG) fibers have
fast contractions and primarily use anaerobic glycolysis. The FG fibers fatigue more quickly than the others. Most
skeletal muscles in a human contain(s) all three types, although in varying proportions.
The speed of contraction is dependent on how quickly myosin’s ATPase hydrolyzes ATP to produce cross-bridge
action. Fast fibers hydrolyze ATP approximately twice as quickly as slow fibers, resulting in much quicker cross-
bridge cycling (which pulls the thin filaments toward the center of the sarcomeres at a faster rate). The primary
metabolic pathway used by a muscle fiber determines whether the fiber is classified as oxidative or glycolytic. If a
fiber primarily produces ATP through aerobic pathways it is oxidative. More ATP can be produced during each
metabolic cycle, making the fiber more resistant to fatigue. Glycolytic fibers primarily create ATP through anaerobic
glycolysis, which produces less ATP per cycle. As a result, glycolytic fibers fatigue at a quicker rate.
The oxidative fibers contain many more mitochondria than the glycolytic fibers, because aerobic metabolism, which
uses oxygen (O2) in the metabolic pathway, occurs in the mitochondria. The SO fibers possess a large number of
mitochondria and are capable of contracting for longer periods because of the large amount of ATP they can
produce, but they have a relatively small diameter and do not produce a large amount of tension. SO fibers are
extensively supplied with blood capillaries to supply O2 from the red blood cells in the bloodstream. The SO fibers
also possess myoglobin, an O2-carrying molecule similar to O2-carrying hemoglobin in the red blood cells. The
myoglobin stores some of the needed O2 within the fibers themselves (and gives SO fibers their red color). All of
these features allow SO fibers to produce large quantities of ATP, which can sustain muscle activity without fatiguing
for long periods of time.
The fact that SO fibers can function for long periods without fatiguing makes them useful in maintaining posture,
producing isometric contractions, stabilizing bones and joints, and making small movements that happen often but
do not require large amounts of energy. They do not produce high tension, and thus they are not used for powerful,
fast movements that require high amounts of energy and rapid cross-bridge cycling.
FO fibers are sometimes called intermediate fibers because they possess characteristics that are intermediate
between fast fibers and slow fibers. They produce ATP relatively quickly, more quickly than SO fibers, and thus can
produce relatively high amounts of tension. They are oxidative because they produce ATP aerobically, possess high
amounts of mitochondria, and do not fatigue quickly. However, FO fibers do not possess significant myoglobin,
giving them a lighter color than the red SO fibers. FO fibers are used primarily for movements, such as walking, that
require more energy than postural control but less energy than an explosive movement, such as sprinting. FO fibers
are useful for this type of movement because they produce more tension than SO fibers but they are more fatigue-
resistant than FG fibers.
FG fibers primarily use anaerobic glycolysis as their ATP source. They have a large diameter and possess high
amounts of glycogen, which is used in glycolysis to generate ATP quickly to produce high levels of tension. Because
they do not primarily use aerobic metabolism, they do not possess substantial numbers of mitochondria or
significant amounts of myoglobin and therefore have a white color. FG fibers are used to produce rapid, forceful
contractions to make quick, powerful movements. These fibers fatigue quickly, permitting them to only be used for
short periods. Most muscles possess a mixture of each fiber type. The predominant fiber type in a muscle is
determined by the primary function of the muscle.
