10.9 Development and Regeneration of Muscle Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the function of satellite cells
•
Define fibrosis
•
Explain which muscle has the greatest regeneration ability
Most muscle tissue of the body arises from embryonic mesoderm. Paraxial mesodermal cells adjacent to the neural
tube form blocks of cells called somites. Skeletal muscles, excluding those of the head and limbs, develop from
mesodermal somites, whereas skeletal muscle in the head and limbs develop from general mesoderm. Somites give
rise to myoblasts. A myoblast is a muscle-forming stem cell that migrates to different regions in the body and then
fuse(s) to form a syncytium, or myotube. As a myotube is formed from many different myoblast cells, it contains
many nuclei, but has a continuous cytoplasm. This is why skeletal muscle cells are multinucleate, as the nucleus of
each contributing myoblast remains intact in the mature skeletal muscle cell. However, cardiac and smooth muscle
cells are not multinucleate because the myoblasts that form their cells do not fuse.
Gap junctions develop in the cardiac and single-unit smooth muscle in the early stages of development. In skeletal
muscles, ACh receptors are initially present along most of the surface of the myoblasts, but spinal nerve innervation
causes the release of growth factors that stimulate the formation of motor end-plates and NMJs. As neurons
become active, electrical signals that are sent through the muscle influence the distribution of slow and fast fibers in
the muscle.
Although the number of muscle cells is set during development, satellite cells help to repair skeletal muscle cells. A
satellite cell is similar to a myoblast because it is a type of stem cell; however, satellite cells are incorporated into
muscle cells and facilitate the protein synthesis required for repair and growth. These cells are located outside the
sarcolemma and are stimulated to grow and fuse with muscle cells by growth factors that are released by muscle
fibers under certain forms of stress. Satellite cells can regenerate muscle fibers to a very limited extent, but they
primarily help to repair damage in living cells. If a cell is damaged to a greater extent than can be repaired by
satellite cells, the muscle fibers are replaced by scar tissue in a process called fibrosis. Because scar tissue cannot
contract, muscle that has sustained significant damage loses strength and cannot produce the same amount of
power or endurance as it could before being damaged.
