9.2 Fibrous Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structural features of fibrous joints
•
Distinguish between a suture, syndesmosis, and gomphosis
•
Give an example of each type of fibrous joint
At a fibrous joint, the adjacent bones are directly connected to each other by fibrous connective tissue, and thus the
bones do not have a joint cavity between them (Figure 9.5). The gap between the bones may be narrow or wide.
There are three types of fibrous joints. A suture is the narrow fibrous joint found between most bones of the skull. At
a syndesmosis joint, the bones are more widely separated but are held together by a narrow band of fibrous
connective tissue called a ligament or a wide sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane. This
type of fibrous joint is found between the shaft regions of the long bones in the forearm and in the leg. Lastly, a
gomphosis is the narrow fibrous joint between the roots of a tooth and the bony socket in the jaw into which the
tooth fits.

FIGURE 9.5
Fibrous Joints
Fibrous joints form strong connections between bones. (a) Sutures join most bones of the skull. (b) An
interosseous membrane forms a syndesmosis between the radius and ulna bones of the forearm. (c) A gomphosis is a specialized fibrous
joint that anchors a tooth to its socket in the jaw.
Suture
All the bones of the skull, except for the mandible, are joined to each other by a fibrous joint called a suture. The
fibrous connective tissue found at a suture (“to bind or sew”) strongly unites the adjacent skull bones and thus
helps to protect the brain and form the face. In adults, the skull bones are closely opposed and fibrous connective
tissue fills the narrow gap between the bones. The suture is frequently convoluted, forming a tight union that
prevents most movement between the bones. (See Figure 9.5a.) Thus, skull sutures are functionally classified as a
synarthrosis, although some sutures may allow for slight movements between the cranial bones.
In newborns and infants, the areas of connective tissue between the bones are much wider, especially in those
areas on the top and sides of the skull that will become the sagittal, coronal, squamous, and lambdoid sutures.
These broad areas of connective tissue are called fontanelles (Figure 9.6). During birth, the fontanelles provide
flexibility to the skull, allowing the bones to push closer together or to overlap slightly, thus aiding movement of the
infant’s head through the birth canal. After birth, these expanded regions of connective tissue allow for rapid growth
of the skull and enlargement of the brain. The fontanelles greatly decrease in width during the first year after birth as
the skull bones enlarge. When the connective tissue between the adjacent bones is reduced to a narrow layer, these
fibrous joints are now called sutures. At some sutures, the connective tissue will ossify and be converted into bone,
causing the adjacent bones to fuse to each other. This fusion between bones is called a synostosis (“joined by
bone”). Examples of synostosis fusions between cranial bones are found both early and late in life. At the time of
birth, the frontal and maxillary bones consist of right and left halves joined together by sutures, which disappear by
the eighth year as the halves fuse together to form a single bone. Late in life, the sagittal, coronal, and lambdoid
sutures of the skull will begin to ossify and fuse, causing the suture line to gradually disappear.

FIGURE 9.6
The Newborn Skull
The fontanelles of a newborn’s skull are broad areas of fibrous connective tissue that form fibrous
joints between the bones of the skull.
Syndesmosis
A syndesmosis (“fastened with a band”) is a type of fibrous joint in which two parallel bones are united to each
other by fibrous connective tissue. The gap between the bones may be narrow, with the bones joined by ligaments,
or the gap may be wide and filled in by a broad sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane.
In the forearm, the wide gap between the shaft portions of the radius and ulna bones are strongly united by an
interosseous membrane (see Figure 9.5b). Similarly, in the leg, the shafts of the tibia and fibula are also united by an
interosseous membrane. In addition, at the distal tibiofibular joint, the articulating surfaces of the bones lack
cartilage and the narrow gap between the bones is anchored by fibrous connective tissue and ligaments on both the
anterior and posterior aspects of the joint. Together, the interosseous membrane and these ligaments form the
tibiofibular syndesmosis.
The syndesmoses found in the forearm and leg serve to unite parallel bones and prevent their separation. However,
a syndesmosis does not prevent all movement between the bones, and thus this type of fibrous joint is functionally
classified as an amphiarthrosis. In the leg, the syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula strongly unites the bones,
allows for little movement, and firmly locks the talus bone in place between the tibia and fibula at the ankle joint.
This provides strength and stability to the leg and ankle, which are important during weight bearing. In the forearm,
the interosseous membrane is flexible enough to allow for rotation of the radius bone during forearm movements.
Thus in contrast to the stability provided by the tibiofibular syndesmosis, the flexibility of the antebrachial
interosseous membrane allows for the much greater mobility of the forearm.
The interosseous membranes of the leg and forearm also provide areas for muscle attachment. Damage to a
syndesmotic joint, which usually results from a fracture of the bone with an accompanying tear of the interosseous
membrane, will produce pain, loss of stability of the bones, and may damage the muscles attached to the
interosseous membrane. If the fracture site is not properly immobilized with a cast or splint, contractile activity by
these muscles can cause improper alignment of the broken bones during healing.
Gomphosis
A gomphosis (“fastened with bolts”) is the specialized fibrous joint that anchors the root of a tooth into its bony
socket within the maxillary bone (upper jaw) or mandible bone (lower jaw) of the skull. A gomphosis is also known
as a peg-and-socket joint. Spanning between the bony walls of the socket and the root of the tooth are numerous
short bands of dense connective tissue, each of which is called a periodontal ligament (see Figure 9.5c). Due to the
immobility of a gomphosis, this type of joint is functionally classified as a synarthrosis.
