9.3 Cartilaginous Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structural features of cartilaginous joints
•
Distinguish between a synchondrosis and symphysis
•
Give an example of each type of cartilaginous joint
As the name indicates, at a cartilaginous joint, the adjacent bones are united by cartilage, a tough but flexible type of
connective tissue. These types of joints lack a joint cavity and involve bones that are joined together by either
hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage (Figure 9.7). There are two types of cartilaginous joints. A synchondrosis is a
cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by hyaline cartilage. Also classified as a synchondrosis are places
where bone is united to a cartilage structure, such as between the anterior end of a rib and the costal cartilage of the
thoracic cage. The second type of cartilaginous joint is a symphysis, where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage.
FIGURE 9.7
Cartilaginous Joints
At cartilaginous joints, bones are united by hyaline cartilage to form a synchondrosis or by
fibrocartilage to form a symphysis. (a) The hyaline cartilage of the epiphyseal plate (growth plate) forms a synchondrosis that unites the
shaft (diaphysis) and end (epiphysis) of a long bone and allows the bone to grow in length. (b) The pubic portions of the right and left hip
bones of the pelvis are joined together by fibrocartilage, forming the pubic symphysis.
Synchondrosis
A synchondrosis (“joined by cartilage”) is a cartilaginous joint where bones are joined together by hyaline cartilage,
or where bone is united to hyaline cartilage. A synchondrosis may be temporary or permanent. A temporary
synchondrosis is the epiphyseal plate (growth plate) of a growing long bone. The epiphyseal plate is the region of
growing hyaline cartilage that unites the diaphysis (shaft) of the bone to the epiphysis (end of the bone). Bone
lengthening involves growth of the epiphyseal plate cartilage and its replacement by bone, which adds to the
diaphysis. For many years during childhood growth, the rates of cartilage growth and bone formation are equal and
thus the epiphyseal plate does not change in overall thickness as the bone lengthens. During the late teens and
early 20s, growth of the cartilage slows and eventually stops. The epiphyseal plate is then completely replaced by
bone, and the diaphysis and epiphysis portions of the bone fuse together to form a single adult bone. This fusion of
the diaphysis and epiphysis is a synostosis. Once this occurs, bone lengthening ceases. For this reason, the
epiphyseal plate is considered to be a temporary synchondrosis. Because cartilage is softer than bone tissue, injury
to a growing long bone can damage the epiphyseal plate cartilage, thus stopping bone growth and preventing
additional bone lengthening.
Growing layers of cartilage also form synchondroses that join together the ilium, ischium, and pubic portions of the
hip bone during childhood and adolescence. When body growth stops, the cartilage disappears and is replaced by
bone, forming synostoses and fusing the bony components together into the single hip bone of the adult. Similarly,
synostoses unite the sacral vertebrae that fuse together to form the adult sacrum.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/childhand) to view a radiograph (X-ray image) of a child’s hand and wrist.
The growing bones of child have an epiphyseal plate that forms a synchondrosis between the shaft and end of a long
bone. Being less dense than bone, the area of epiphyseal cartilage is seen on this radiograph as the dark epiphyseal
gaps located near the ends of the long bones, including the radius, ulna, metacarpal, and phalanx bones. Which of
the bones in this image do not show an epiphyseal plate (epiphyseal gap)?
Examples of permanent synchondroses are found in the thoracic cage. One example is the first sternocostal joint,
where the first rib is anchored to the manubrium by its costal cartilage. (The articulations of the remaining costal
cartilages to the sternum are all synovial joints.) Additional synchondroses are formed where the anterior end of the
other 11 ribs is joined to its costal cartilage. Unlike the temporary synchondroses of the epiphyseal plate, these
permanent synchondroses retain their hyaline cartilage and thus do not ossify with age. Due to the lack of
movement between the bone and cartilage, both temporary and permanent synchondroses are functionally
classified as a synarthrosis.

Symphysis
A cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage is called a symphysis (“growing together”).
Fibrocartilage is very strong because it contains numerous bundles of thick collagen fibers, thus giving it a much
greater ability to resist pulling and bending forces when compared with hyaline cartilage. This gives symphyses the
ability to strongly unite the adjacent bones, but can still allow for limited movement to occur. Thus, a symphysis is
functionally classified as an amphiarthrosis.
The gap separating the bones at a symphysis may be narrow or wide. Examples in which the gap between the bones
is narrow include the pubic symphysis and the manubriosternal joint. At the pubic symphysis, the pubic portions of
the right and left hip bones of the pelvis are joined together by fibrocartilage across a narrow gap. Similarly, at the
manubriosternal joint, fibrocartilage unites the manubrium and body portions of the sternum.
The intervertebral symphysis is a wide symphysis located between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae of the vertebral
column. Here a thick pad of fibrocartilage called an intervertebral disc strongly unites the adjacent vertebrae by
filling the gap between them. The width of the intervertebral symphysis is important because it allows for small
movements between the adjacent vertebrae. In addition, the thick intervertebral disc provides cushioning between
the vertebrae, which is important when carrying heavy objects or during high-impact activities such as running or
jumping.
