13.4 The Peripheral Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structures found in the PNS
•
Distinguish between somatic and autonomic structures, including the special peripheral structures of the
enteric nervous system
•
Name the twelve cranial nerves and explain the functions associated with each
•
Describe the sensory and motor components of spinal nerves and the plexuses that they pass through
The PNS is not as contained as the CNS because it is defined as everything that is not the CNS. Some peripheral
structures are incorporated into the other organs of the body. In describing the anatomy of the PNS, it is necessary
to describe the common structures, the nerves and the ganglia, as they are found in various parts of the body. Many
of the neural structures that are incorporated into other organs are features of the digestive system; these
structures are known as the enteric nervous system and are a special subset of the PNS.
Ganglia
A ganglion is a group of neuron cell bodies in the periphery. Ganglia can be categorized, for the most part, as either
sensory ganglia or autonomic ganglia, referring to their primary functions. The most common type of sensory
ganglion is a dorsal (posterior) root ganglion. These ganglia are the cell bodies of neurons with axons that are
sensory endings in the periphery, such as in the skin, and that extend into the CNS through the dorsal nerve root.
The ganglion is an enlargement of the nerve root. Under microscopic inspection, it can be seen to include the cell
bodies of the neurons, as well as bundles of fibers that are the posterior nerve root (Figure 13.19). The cells of the
dorsal root ganglion are unipolar cells, classifying them by shape. Also, the small round nuclei of satellite cells can
be seen surrounding—as if they were orbiting—the neuron cell bodies.

FIGURE 13.19
Dorsal Root Ganglion
The cell bodies of sensory neurons, which are unipolar neurons by shape, are seen in this
photomicrograph. Also, the fibrous region is composed of the axons of these neurons that are passing through the ganglion to be part of the
dorsal nerve root (tissue source: canine). LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
FIGURE 13.20
Spinal Cord and Root Ganglion
The slide includes both a cross-section of the lumbar spinal cord and a section of the
dorsal root ganglion (see also Figure 13.19) (tissue source: canine). LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/spinalroot) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom in on the dorsal root ganglion, you can see smaller satellite glial cells surrounding the large cell
bodies of the sensory neurons. From what structure do satellite cells derive during embryologic development?
Another type of sensory ganglion is a cranial nerve ganglion. This is analogous to the dorsal root ganglion, except
that it is associated with a cranial nerve instead of a spinal nerve. The roots of cranial nerves are within the
cranium, whereas the ganglia are outside the skull. For example, the trigeminal ganglion is superficial to the
temporal bone whereas its associated nerve is attached to the mid-pons region of the brain stem. The neurons of
cranial nerve ganglia are also unipolar in shape with associated satellite cells.
The other major category of ganglia are those of the autonomic nervous system, which is divided into the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic chain ganglia constitute a row of ganglia
along the vertebral column that receive central input from the lateral horn of the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal
cord. Superior to the chain ganglia are three paravertebral ganglia in the cervical region. Three other autonomic
ganglia that are related to the sympathetic chain are the prevertebral ganglia, which are located outside of the
chain but have similar functions. They are referred to as prevertebral because they are anterior to the vertebral
column. The neurons of these autonomic ganglia are multipolar in shape, with dendrites radiating out around the
cell body where synapses from the spinal cord neurons are made. The neurons of the chain, paravertebral, and
prevertebral ganglia then project to organs in the head and neck, thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities to regulate
the sympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms.
Another group of autonomic ganglia are the terminal ganglia that receive input from cranial nerves or sacral spinal
nerves and are responsible for regulating the parasympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms. These two sets
of ganglia, sympathetic and parasympathetic, often project to the same organs—one input from the chain ganglia
and one input from a terminal ganglion—to regulate the overall function of an organ. For example, the heart receives
two inputs such as these; one increases heart rate, and the other decreases it. The terminal ganglia that receive
input from cranial nerves are found in the head and neck, as well as the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities,
whereas the terminal ganglia that receive sacral input are in the lower abdominal and pelvic cavities.
Terminal ganglia below the head and neck are often incorporated into the wall of the target organ as a plexus. A
plexus, in a general sense, is a network of fibers or vessels. This can apply to nervous tissue (as in this instance) or
structures containing blood vessels (such as a choroid plexus). For example, the enteric plexus is the extensive
network of axons and neurons in the wall of the small and large intestines. The enteric plexus is actually part of the
enteric nervous system, along with the gastric plexuses and the esophageal plexus. Though the enteric nervous
system receives input originating from central neurons of the autonomic nervous system, it does not require CNS
input to function. In fact, it operates independently to regulate the digestive system.
Nerves
Bundles of axons in the PNS are referred to as nerves. These structures in the periphery are different than the
central counterpart, called a tract. Nerves are composed of more than just nervous tissue. They have connective
tissues invested in their structure, as well as blood vessels supplying the tissues with nourishment. The outer
surface of a nerve is a surrounding layer of fibrous connective tissue called the epineurium. Within the nerve, axons
are further bundled into fascicles, which are each surrounded by their own layer of fibrous connective tissue called
perineurium. Finally, individual axons are surrounded by loose connective tissue called the endoneurium (Figure
13.21). These three layers are similar to the connective tissue sheaths for muscles. Nerves are associated with the
region of the CNS to which they are connected, either as cranial nerves connected to the brain or spinal nerves
connected to the spinal cord.

FIGURE 13.21
Nerve Structure
The structure of a nerve is organized by the layers of connective tissue on the outside, around each
fascicle, and surrounding the individual nerve fibers (tissue source: simian). LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
FIGURE 13.22
Close-Up of Nerve Trunk
Zoom in on this slide of a nerve trunk to examine the endoneurium, perineurium, and
epineurium in greater detail (tissue source: simian). LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/nervetrunk) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. With what structures in a skeletal muscle are the endoneurium, perineurium, and epineurium comparable?
Cranial Nerves
The nerves attached to the brain are the cranial nerves, which are primarily responsible for the sensory and motor
functions of the head and neck (one of these nerves targets organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities as part of
the parasympathetic nervous system). There are twelve cranial nerves, which are designated CNI through CNXII for
“Cranial Nerve,” using Roman numerals for 1 through 12. They can be classified as sensory nerves, motor nerves, or
a combination of both, meaning that the axons in these nerves originate out of sensory ganglia external to the
cranium or motor nuclei within the brain stem. Sensory axons enter the brain to synapse in a nucleus. Motor axons
connect to skeletal muscles of the head or neck. Three of the nerves are solely composed of sensory fibers; five are
strictly motor; and the remaining four are mixed nerves.
Learning the cranial nerves is a tradition in anatomy courses, and students have always used mnemonic devices to
remember the nerve names. A traditional mnemonic is the rhyming couplet, “On Old Olympus’ Towering Tops/A Finn
And German Viewed Some Hops,” in which the initial letter of each word corresponds to the initial letter in the name
of each nerve. The names of the nerves have changed over the years to reflect current usage and more accurate
naming. An exercise to help learn this sort of information is to generate a mnemonic using words that have personal
significance. The names of the cranial nerves are listed in Table 13.3 along with a brief description of their function,
their source (sensory ganglion or motor nucleus), and their target (sensory nucleus or skeletal muscle). They are
listed here with a brief explanation of each nerve (Figure 13.23).
The olfactory nerve and optic nerve are responsible for the sense of smell and vision, respectively. The oculomotor
nerve is responsible for eye movements by controlling four of the extraocular muscles. It is also responsible for
lifting the upper eyelid when the eyes point up, and for pupillary constriction. The trochlear nerve and the
abducens nerve are both responsible for eye movement, but do so by controlling different extraocular muscles. The
trigeminal nerve is responsible for cutaneous sensations of the face and controlling the muscles of mastication.
The facial nerve is responsible for the muscles involved in facial expressions, as well as part of the sense of taste
and the production of saliva. The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible for the senses of hearing and balance. The
glossopharyngeal nerve is responsible for controlling muscles in the oral cavity and upper throat, as well as part of
the sense of taste and the production of saliva. The vagus nerve is responsible for contributing to homeostatic
control of the organs of the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities. The spinal accessory nerve is responsible for
controlling the muscles of the neck, along with cervical spinal nerves. The hypoglossal nerve is responsible for
controlling the muscles of the lower throat and tongue.

FIGURE 13.23
The Cranial Nerves
The anatomical arrangement of the roots of the cranial nerves observed from an inferior view of the
brain.
Three of the cranial nerves also contain autonomic fibers, and a fourth is almost purely a component of the
autonomic system. The oculomotor, facial, and glossopharyngeal nerves contain fibers that contact autonomic
ganglia. The oculomotor fibers initiate pupillary constriction, whereas the facial and glossopharyngeal fibers both
initiate salivation. The vagus nerve primarily targets autonomic ganglia in the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/NYTmeningitis) to read about a man who wakes with a headache and a loss of
vision. His regular doctor sent him to an ophthalmologist to address the vision loss. The ophthalmologist recognizes
a greater problem and immediately sends him to the emergency room. Once there, the patient undergoes a large
battery of tests, but a definite cause cannot be found. A specialist recognizes the problem as meningitis, but the
question is what caused it originally. How can that be cured? The loss of vision comes from swelling around the optic
nerve, which probably presented as a bulge on the inside of the eye. Why is swelling related to meningitis going to
push on the optic nerve?
Another important aspect of the cranial nerves that lends itself to a mnemonic is the functional role each nerve
plays. The nerves fall into one of three basic groups. They are sensory, motor, or both (see Table 13.3). The
sentence, “Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Brains Beauty Matter More,” corresponds to the basic
function of each nerve. The first, second, and eighth nerves are purely sensory: the olfactory (CNI), optic (CNII), and
vestibulocochlear (CNVIII) nerves. The three eye-movement nerves are all motor: the oculomotor (CNIII), trochlear
(CNIV), and abducens (CNVI). The spinal accessory (CNXI) and hypoglossal (CNXII) nerves are also strictly motor.
The remainder of the nerves contain both sensory and motor fibers. They are the trigeminal (CNV), facial (CNVII),
glossopharyngeal (CNIX), and vagus (CNX) nerves. The nerves that convey both are often related to each other. The
trigeminal and facial nerves both concern the face; one concerns the sensations and the other concerns the muscle
movements. The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves are both responsible for conveying gustatory, or taste,
sensations as well as controlling salivary glands. The vagus nerve is involved in visceral responses to taste, namely
the gag reflex. This is not an exhaustive list of what these combination nerves do, but there is a thread of relation
between them.

Cranial Nerves
Mnemonic
#
Name
Function
(S/M/B)
Central connection
(nuclei)
Peripheral connection
(ganglion or muscle)
On
I
Olfactory
Smell (S)
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory epithelium
Old
II
Optic
Vision (S)
Hypothalamus/
thalamus/midbrain
Retina (retinal ganglion cells)
Olympus’
III
Oculomotor
Eye
movements
(M)
Oculomotor
nucleus
Extraocular muscles (other
4), levator palpebrae
superioris, ciliary ganglion
(autonomic)
Towering
IV
Trochlear
Eye
movements
(M)
Trochlear nucleus
Superior oblique muscle
Tops
V
Trigeminal
Sensory/
motor –
face (B)
Trigeminal nuclei in
the midbrain, pons,
and medulla
Trigeminal
A
VI
Abducens
Eye
movements
(M)
Abducens nucleus
Lateral rectus muscle
Finn
VII
Facial
Motor –
face, Taste
(B)
Facial nucleus,
solitary nucleus,
superior salivatory
nucleus
Facial muscles, Geniculate
ganglion, Pterygopalatine
ganglion (autonomic)
And
VIII
Auditory
(Vestibulocochlear)
Hearing/
balance (S)
Cochlear nucleus,
Vestibular nucleus/
cerebellum
Spiral ganglion (hearing),
Vestibular ganglion (balance)
German
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Motor –
throat Taste
(B)
Solitary nucleus,
inferior salivatory
nucleus, nucleus
ambiguus
Pharyngeal muscles,
Geniculate ganglion, Otic
ganglion (autonomic)
Viewed
X
Vagus
Motor/
sensory –
viscera
(autonomic)
(B)
Medulla
Terminal ganglia serving
thoracic and upper abdominal
organs (heart and small
intestines)
TABLE 13.3
524
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
Mnemonic
#
Name
Function
(S/M/B)
Central connection
(nuclei)
Peripheral connection
(ganglion or muscle)
Some
XI
Spinal Accessory
Motor –
head and
neck (M)
Spinal accessory
nucleus
Neck muscles
Hops
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor –
lower throat
(M)
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Muscles of the larynx and
lower pharynx
TABLE 13.3
Spinal Nerves
The nerves connected to the spinal cord are the spinal nerves. The arrangement of these nerves is much more
regular than that of the cranial nerves. All of the spinal nerves are combined sensory and motor axons that separate
into two nerve roots. The sensory axons enter the spinal cord as the dorsal nerve root. The motor fibers, both
somatic and autonomic, emerge as the ventral nerve root. The dorsal root ganglion for each nerve is an enlargement
of the spinal nerve.
There are 31 spinal nerves, named for the level of the spinal cord at which each one emerges. There are eight pairs
of cervical nerves designated C1 to C8, twelve thoracic nerves designated T1 to T12, five pairs of lumbar nerves
designated L1 to L5, five pairs of sacral nerves designated S1 to S5, and one pair of coccygeal nerves. The nerves
are numbered from the superior to inferior positions, and each emerges from the vertebral column through the
intervertebral foramen at its level. The first nerve, C1, emerges between the first cervical vertebra and the occipital
bone. The second nerve, C2, emerges between the first and second cervical vertebrae. The same occurs for C3 to
C7, but C8 emerges between the seventh cervical vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra. For the thoracic and
lumbar nerves, each one emerges between the vertebra that has the same designation and the next vertebra in the
column. The sacral nerves emerge from the sacral foramina along the length of that unique vertebra.
Spinal nerves extend outward from the vertebral column to innervate the periphery. The nerves in the periphery are
not straight continuations of the spinal nerves, but rather the reorganization of the axons in those nerves to follow
different courses. Axons from different spinal nerves will come together into a systemic nerve. This occurs at four
places along the length of the vertebral column, each identified as a nerve plexus, whereas the other spinal nerves
directly correspond to nerves at their respective levels. In this instance, the word plexus is used to describe
networks of nerve fibers with no associated cell bodies.
Of the four nerve plexuses, two are found at the cervical level, one at the lumbar level, and one at the sacral level
(Figure 13.24). The cervical plexus is composed of axons from spinal nerves C1 through C5 and branches into
nerves in the posterior neck and head, as well as the phrenic nerve, which connects to the diaphragm at the base of
the thoracic cavity. The other plexus from the cervical level is the brachial plexus. Spinal nerves C4 through T1
reorganize through this plexus to give rise to the nerves of the arms, as the name brachial suggests. A large nerve
from this plexus is the radial nerve from which the axillary nerve branches to go to the armpit region. The radial
nerve continues through the arm and is paralleled by the ulnar nerve and the median nerve. The lumbar plexus
arises from all the lumbar spinal nerves and gives rise to nerves enervating the pelvic region and the anterior leg.
The femoral nerve is one of the major nerves from this plexus, which gives rise to the saphenous nerve as a branch
that extends through the anterior lower leg. The sacral plexus comes from the lower lumbar nerves L4 and L5 and
the sacral nerves S1 to S4. The most significant systemic nerve to come from this plexus is the sciatic nerve, which
is a combination of the tibial nerve and the fibular nerve. The sciatic nerve extends across the hip joint and is most
commonly associated with the condition sciatica, which is the result of compression or irritation of the nerve or any
of the spinal nerves giving rise to it.
These plexuses are described as arising from spinal nerves and giving rise to certain systemic nerves, but they
contain fibers that serve sensory functions or fibers that serve motor functions. This means that some fibers extend
from cutaneous or other peripheral sensory surfaces and send action potentials into the CNS. Those are axons of
sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia that enter the spinal cord through the dorsal nerve root. Other fibers are
the axons of motor neurons of the anterior horn of the spinal cord, which emerge in the ventral nerve root and send
action potentials to cause skeletal muscles to contract in their target regions. For example, the radial nerve contains
fibers of cutaneous sensation in the arm, as well as motor fibers that move muscles in the arm.
Spinal nerves of the thoracic region, T2 through T11, are not part of the plexuses but rather emerge and give rise to
the intercostal nerves found between the ribs, which articulate with the vertebrae surrounding the spinal nerve.
FIGURE 13.24
Nerve Plexuses of the Body
There are four main nerve plexuses in the human body. The cervical plexus supplies nerves
to the posterior head and neck, as well as to the diaphragm. The brachial plexus supplies nerves to the arm. The lumbar plexus supplies
nerves to the anterior leg. The sacral plexus supplies nerves to the posterior leg.
