12.2 Nervous Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the basic structure of a neuron
•
Identify the different types of neurons on the basis of polarity
•
List the glial cells of the CNS and describe their function
•
List the glial cells of the PNS and describe their function
Nervous tissue is composed of two types of cells, neurons and glial cells. Neurons are the primary type of cell that
most anyone associates with the nervous system. They are responsible for the computation and communication
that the nervous system provides. They are electrically active and release chemical signals to target cells. Glial cells,
or glia, are known to play a supporting role for nervous tissue. Ongoing research pursues an expanded role that glial
cells might play in signaling, but neurons are still considered the basis of this function. Neurons are important, but
without glial support they would not be able to perform their function.
FIGURE 12.7
fMRI
This fMRI shows activation of the visual cortex in response to visual stimuli. (credit: “Superborsuk”/Wikimedia
Commons)
The underlying assumption is that active nervous tissue will have greater blood flow. By having the subject
perform a visual task, activity all over the brain can be measured. Consider this possible experiment: the subject
is told to look at a screen with a black dot in the middle (a fixation point). A photograph of a face is projected on
the screen away from the center. The subject has to look at the photograph and decipher what it is. The subject
has been instructed to push a button if the photograph is of someone they recognize. The photograph might be
of a celebrity, so the subject would press the button, or it might be of a random person unknown to the subject,
so the subject would not press the button.
In this task, visual sensory areas would be active, integrating areas would be active, motor areas responsible for
moving the eyes would be active, and motor areas for pressing the button with a finger would be active. Those
areas are distributed all around the brain and the fMRI images would show activity in more than just 10 percent
of the brain (some evidence suggests that about 80 percent of the brain is using energy—based on blood flow to
the tissue—during well-defined tasks similar to the one suggested above). This task does not even include all of
the functions the brain performs. There is no language response, the body is mostly lying still in the MRI
machine, and it does not consider the autonomic functions that would be ongoing in the background.

Neurons
Neurons are the cells considered to be the basis of nervous tissue. They are responsible for the electrical signals
that communicate information about sensations, and that produce movements in response to those stimuli, along
with inducing thought processes within the brain. An important part of the function of neurons is in their structure,
or shape. The three-dimensional shape of these cells makes the immense numbers of connections within the
nervous system possible.
Parts of a Neuron
As you learned in the first section, the main part of a neuron is the cell body, which is also known as the soma (soma
= “body”). The cell body contains the nucleus and most of the major organelles. But what makes neurons special is
that they have many extensions of their cell membranes, which are generally referred to as processes. Neurons are
usually described as having one, and only one, axon—a fiber that emerges from the cell body and projects to target
cells. That single axon can branch repeatedly to communicate with many target cells. It is the axon that propagates
the nerve impulse, which is communicated to one or more cells. The other processes of the neuron are dendrites,
which receive information from other neurons at specialized areas of contact called synapses. The dendrites are
usually highly branched processes, providing locations for other neurons to communicate with the cell body.
Information flows through a neuron from the dendrites, across the cell body, and down the axon. This gives the
neuron a polarity—meaning that information flows in this one direction. Figure 12.8 shows the relationship of these
parts to one another.
FIGURE 12.8
Parts of a Neuron
The major parts of the neuron are labeled on a multipolar neuron from the CNS.
Where the axon emerges from the cell body, there is a special region referred to as the axon hillock. This is a
tapering of the cell body toward the axon fiber. Within the axon hillock, the cytoplasm changes to a solution of
limited components called axoplasm. Because the axon hillock represents the beginning of the axon, it is also
referred to as the initial segment.
Many axons are wrapped by an insulating substance called myelin, which is actually made from glial cells. Myelin
acts as insulation much like the plastic or rubber that is used to insulate electrical wires. A key difference between
myelin and the insulation on a wire is that there are gaps in the myelin covering of an axon. Each gap is called a node
of Ranvier and is important to the way that electrical signals travel down the axon. The length of the axon between
each gap, which is wrapped in myelin, is referred to as an axon segment. At the end of the axon is the axon
terminal, where there are usually several branches extending toward the target cell, each of which ends in an
enlargement called a synaptic end bulb. These bulbs are what make the connection with the target cell at the
synapse.
Types of Neurons
There are many neurons in the nervous system—a number in the trillions. And there are many different types of
neurons. They can be classified by many different criteria. The first way to classify them is by the number of
processes attached to the cell body. Using the standard model of neurons, one of these processes is the axon, and
the rest are dendrites. Because information flows through the neuron from dendrites or cell bodies toward the axon,
these names are based on the neuron's polarity (Figure 12.9).
FIGURE 12.9
Neuron Classification by Shape
Unipolar cells have one process that includes both the axon and dendrite. Bipolar cells
have two processes, the axon and a dendrite. Multipolar cells have more than two processes, the axon and two or more dendrites.
Unipolar cells have only one process emerging from the cell. True unipolar cells are only found in invertebrate
animals, so the unipolar cells in humans are more appropriately called “pseudo-unipolar” cells. Invertebrate
unipolar cells do not have dendrites. Human unipolar cells have an axon that emerges from the cell body, but it splits
so that the axon can extend along a very long distance. At one end of the axon are dendrites, and at the other end,
the axon forms synaptic connections with a target. Unipolar cells are exclusively sensory neurons and have two
unique characteristics. First, their dendrites are receiving sensory information, sometimes directly from the stimulus
itself. Secondly, the cell bodies of unipolar neurons are always found in ganglia. Sensory reception is a peripheral
function (those dendrites are in the periphery, perhaps in the skin) so the cell body is in the periphery, though closer
to the CNS in a ganglion. The axon projects from the dendrite endings, past the cell body in a ganglion, and into the
central nervous system.
Bipolar cells have two processes, which extend from each end of the cell body, opposite to each other. One is the
axon and one the dendrite. Bipolar cells are not very common. They are found mainly in the olfactory epithelium
(where smell stimuli are sensed), and as part of the retina.
Multipolar neurons are all of the neurons that are not unipolar or bipolar. They have one axon and two or more
dendrites (usually many more). With the exception of the unipolar sensory ganglion cells, and the two specific
bipolar cells mentioned above, all other neurons are multipolar. Some cutting edge research suggests that certain
neurons in the CNS do not conform to the standard model of “one, and only one” axon. Some sources describe a
fourth type of neuron, called an anaxonic neuron. The name suggests that it has no axon (an- = “without”), but this
is not accurate. Anaxonic neurons are very small, and if you look through a microscope at the standard resolution
used in histology (approximately 400X to 1000X total magnification), you will not be able to distinguish any process
specifically as an axon or a dendrite. Any of those processes can function as an axon depending on the conditions at
any given time. Nevertheless, even if they cannot be easily seen, and one specific process is definitively the axon,
these neurons have multiple processes and are therefore multipolar.
Neurons can also be classified on the basis of where they are found, who found them, what they do, or even what
chemicals they use to communicate with each other. Some neurons referred to in this section on the nervous system
are named on the basis of those sorts of classifications (Figure 12.10). For example, a multipolar neuron that has a
very important role to play in a part of the brain called the cerebellum is known as a Purkinje (commonly
pronounced per-KIN-gee) cell. It is named after the anatomist who discovered it (Jan Evangelista Purkinje,
1787–1869).

FIGURE 12.10
Other Neuron Classifications
Three examples of neurons that are classified on the basis of other criteria. (a) The
pyramidal cell is a multipolar cell with a cell body that is shaped something like a pyramid. (b) The Purkinje cell in the cerebellum was
named after the scientist who originally described it. (c) Olfactory neurons are named for the functional group with which they belong.
Glial Cells
Glial cells, or neuroglia or simply glia, are the other type of cell found in nervous tissue. They are considered to be
supporting cells, and many functions are directed at helping neurons complete their function for communication.
The name glia comes from the Greek word that means “glue,” and was coined by the German pathologist Rudolph
Virchow, who wrote in 1856: “This connective substance, which is in the brain, the spinal cord, and the special
sense nerves, is a kind of glue (neuroglia) in which the nervous elements are planted.” Today, research into nervous
tissue has shown that there are many deeper roles that these cells play. And research may find much more about
them in the future.
There are six types of glial cells. Four of them are found in the CNS and two are found in the PNS. Table 12.2 outlines
some common characteristics and functions.
Glial Cell Types by Location and Basic Function
CNS glia
PNS glia
Basic function
Astrocyte
Satellite cell
Support
Oligodendrocyte
Schwann cell
Insulation, myelination
Microglia
-
Immune surveillance and phagocytosis
Ependymal cell
-
Creating CSF
TABLE 12.2
Glial Cells of the CNS
One cell providing support to neurons of the CNS is the astrocyte, so named because it appears to be star-shaped
under the microscope (astro- = “star”). Astrocytes have many processes extending from their main cell body (not
axons or dendrites like neurons, just cell extensions). Those processes extend to interact with neurons, blood
vessels, or the connective tissue covering the CNS that is called the pia mater (Figure 12.11). Generally, they are
supporting cells for the neurons in the central nervous system. Some ways in which they support neurons in the
central nervous system are by maintaining the concentration of chemicals in the extracellular space, removing

excess signaling molecules, reacting to tissue damage, and contributing to the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The
blood-brain barrier is a physiological barrier that keeps many substances that circulate in the rest of the body from
getting into the central nervous system, restricting what can cross from circulating blood into the CNS. Nutrient
molecules, such as glucose or amino acids, can pass through the BBB, but other molecules cannot. This actually
causes problems with drug delivery to the CNS. Pharmaceutical companies are challenged to design drugs that can
cross the BBB as well as have an effect on the nervous system.
FIGURE 12.11
Glial Cells of the CNS
The CNS has astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells that support the
neurons of the CNS in several ways.
Like a few other parts of the body, the brain has a privileged blood supply. Very little can pass through by diffusion.
Most substances that cross the wall of a blood vessel into the CNS must do so through an active transport process.
Because of this, only specific types of molecules can enter the CNS. Glucose—the primary energy source—is
allowed, as are amino acids. Water and some other small particles, like gases and ions, can enter. But most
everything else cannot, including white blood cells, which are one of the body’s main lines of defense. While this
barrier protects the CNS from exposure to toxic or pathogenic substances, it also keeps out the cells that could
protect the brain and spinal cord from disease and damage. The BBB also makes it harder for pharmaceuticals to be
developed that can affect the nervous system. Aside from finding efficacious substances, the means of delivery is
also crucial.
Also found in CNS tissue is the oligodendrocyte, sometimes called just “oligo,” which is the glial cell type that
insulates axons in the CNS. The name means “cell of a few branches” (oligo- = “few”; dendro- = “branches”; -cyte =
“cell”). There are a few processes that extend from the cell body. Each one reaches out and surrounds an axon to
insulate it in myelin. One oligodendrocyte will provide the myelin for multiple axon segments, either for the same
axon or for separate axons. The function of myelin will be discussed below.
Microglia are, as the name implies, smaller than most of the other glial cells. Ongoing research into these cells,
although not entirely conclusive, suggests that they may originate as white blood cells, called macrophages, that
become part of the CNS during early development. While their origin is not conclusively determined, their function is
related to what macrophages do in the rest of the body. When macrophages encounter diseased or damaged cells in
the rest of the body, they ingest and digest those cells or the pathogens that cause disease. Microglia are the cells in
the CNS that can do this in normal, healthy tissue, and they are therefore also referred to as CNS-resident
macrophages.
The ependymal cell is a glial cell that filters blood to make cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), the fluid that circulates
through the CNS. Because of the privileged blood supply inherent in the BBB, the extracellular space in nervous
tissue does not easily exchange components with the blood. Ependymal cells line each ventricle, one of four central
cavities that are remnants of the hollow center of the neural tube formed during the embryonic development of the
brain. The choroid plexus is a specialized structure in the ventricles where ependymal cells come in contact with
blood vessels and filter and absorb components of the blood to produce cerebrospinal fluid. Because of this,
ependymal cells can be considered a component of the BBB, or a place where the BBB breaks down. These glial
cells appear similar to epithelial cells, making a single layer of cells with little intracellular space and tight
connections between adjacent cells. They also have cilia on their apical surface to help move the CSF through the
ventricular space. The relationship of these glial cells to the structure of the CNS is seen in Figure 12.11.
Glial Cells of the PNS
One of the two types of glial cells found in the PNS is the satellite cell. Satellite cells are found in sensory and
autonomic ganglia, where they surround the cell bodies of neurons. This accounts for the name, based on their
appearance under the microscope. They provide support, performing similar functions in the periphery as astrocytes
do in the CNS—except, of course, for establishing the BBB.
The second type of glial cell is the Schwann cell, which insulate axons with myelin in the periphery. Schwann cells
are different than oligodendrocytes, in that a Schwann cell wraps around a portion of only one axon segment and no
others. Oligodendrocytes have processes that reach out to multiple axon segments, whereas the entire Schwann
cell surrounds just one axon segment. The nucleus and cytoplasm of the Schwann cell are on the edge of the myelin
sheath. The relationship of these two types of glial cells to ganglia and nerves in the PNS is seen in Figure 12.12.
FIGURE 12.12
Glial Cells of the PNS
The PNS has satellite cells and Schwann cells.
Myelin
The insulation for axons in the nervous system is provided by glial cells, oligodendrocytes in the CNS, and Schwann
cells in the PNS. Whereas the manner in which either cell is associated with the axon segment, or segments, that it
insulates is different, the means of myelinating an axon segment is mostly the same in the two situations. Myelin is a
lipid-rich sheath that surrounds the axon and by doing so creates a myelin sheath that facilitates the transmission
of electrical signals along the axon. The lipids are essentially the phospholipids of the glial cell membrane. Myelin,
however, is more than just the membrane of the glial cell. It also includes important proteins that are integral to that
membrane. Some of the proteins help to hold the layers of the glial cell membrane closely together.
The appearance of the myelin sheath can be thought of as similar to the pastry wrapped around a hot dog for “pigs
in a blanket” or a similar food. The glial cell is wrapped around the axon several times with little to no cytoplasm
between the glial cell layers. For oligodendrocytes, the rest of the cell is separate from the myelin sheath as a cell
process extends back toward the cell body. A few other processes provide the same insulation for other axon
segments in the area. For Schwann cells, the outermost layer of the cell membrane contains cytoplasm and the
nucleus of the cell as a bulge on one side of the myelin sheath. During development, the glial cell is loosely or
incompletely wrapped around the axon (Figure 12.13a). The edges of this loose enclosure extend toward each
other, and one end tucks under the other. The inner edge wraps around the axon, creating several layers, and the
other edge closes around the outside so that the axon is completely enclosed.

Myelin sheaths can extend for one or two millimeters, depending on the diameter of the axon. Axon diameters can
be as small as 1 to 20 micrometers. Because a micrometer is 1/1000 of a millimeter, this means that the length of a
myelin sheath can be 100–1000 times the diameter of the axon. Figure 12.8, Figure 12.11, and Figure 12.12 show
the myelin sheath surrounding an axon segment, but are not to scale. If the myelin sheath were drawn to scale, the
neuron would have to be immense—possibly covering an entire wall of the room in which you are sitting.
FIGURE 12.13
The Process of Myelination
Myelinating glia wrap several layers of cell membrane around the cell membrane of an axon
segment. A single Schwann cell insulates a segment of a peripheral nerve, whereas in the CNS, an oligodendrocyte may provide insulation
for a few separate axon segments. EM × 1,460,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Nervous Tissue
Several diseases can result from the demyelination of axons. The causes of these diseases are not the same;
some have genetic causes, some are caused by pathogens, and others are the result of autoimmune disorders.
Though the causes are varied, the results are largely similar. The myelin insulation of axons is compromised,
making electrical signaling slower.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is one such disease. It is an example of an autoimmune disease. The antibodies
produced by lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) mark myelin as something that should not be in the body.
This causes inflammation and the destruction of the myelin in the central nervous system. As the insulation
around the axons is destroyed by the disease, scarring becomes obvious. This is where the name of the disease
comes from; sclerosis means hardening of tissue, which is what a scar is. Multiple scars are found in the white
matter of the brain and spinal cord. The symptoms of MS include both somatic and autonomic deficits. Control of
the musculature is compromised, as is control of organs such as the bladder.
Guillain-Barré (pronounced gee-YAN bah-RAY) syndrome is an example of a demyelinating disease of the
peripheral nervous system. It is also the result of an autoimmune reaction, but the inflammation is in peripheral
nerves. Sensory symptoms or motor deficits are common, and autonomic failures can lead to changes in the
heart rhythm or a drop in blood pressure, especially when standing, which causes dizziness.
