18.5 Hemostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the three mechanisms involved in hemostasis
•
Explain how the extrinsic and intrinsic coagulation pathways lead to the common pathway, and the coagulation
factors involved in each
•
Discuss disorders affecting hemostasis
Platelets are key players in hemostasis, the process by which the body seals a ruptured blood vessel and prevents
further loss of blood. Although rupture of larger vessels usually requires medical intervention, hemostasis is quite
effective in dealing with small, simple wounds. There are three steps to the process: vascular spasm, the formation
of a platelet plug, and coagulation (blood clotting). Failure of any of these steps will result in
hemorrhage—excessive bleeding.

Vascular Spasm
When a vessel is severed or punctured, or when the wall of a vessel is damaged, vascular spasm occurs. In vascular
spasm, the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessel contracts dramatically. This smooth muscle has both circular
layers; larger vessels also have longitudinal layers. The circular layers tend to constrict the flow of blood, whereas
the longitudinal layers, when present, draw the vessel back into the surrounding tissue, often making it more
difficult for a surgeon to locate, clamp, and tie off a severed vessel. The vascular spasm response is believed to be
triggered by several chemicals called endothelins that are released by vessel-lining cells and by pain receptors in
response to vessel injury. This phenomenon typically lasts for up to 30 minutes, although it can last for hours.
Formation of the Platelet Plug
In the second step, platelets, which normally float free in the plasma, encounter the area of vessel rupture with the
exposed underlying connective tissue and collagenous fibers. The platelets begin to clump together, become spiked
and sticky, and bind to the exposed collagen and endothelial lining. This process is assisted by a glycoprotein in the
blood plasma called von Willebrand factor, which helps stabilize the growing platelet plug. As platelets collect, they
simultaneously release chemicals from their granules into the plasma that further contribute to hemostasis. Among
the substances released by the platelets are:
•
adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which helps additional platelets to adhere to the injury site, reinforcing and
expanding the platelet plug
•
serotonin, which maintains vasoconstriction
•
prostaglandins and phospholipids, which also maintain vasoconstriction and help to activate further clotting
chemicals, as discussed next
A platelet plug can temporarily seal a small opening in a blood vessel. Plug formation, in essence, buys the body
time while more sophisticated and durable repairs are being made. In a similar manner, even modern naval
warships still carry an assortment of wooden plugs to temporarily repair small breaches in their hulls until
permanent repairs can be made.
Coagulation
Those more sophisticated and more durable repairs are collectively called coagulation, the formation of a blood
clot. The process is sometimes characterized as a cascade, because one event prompts the next as in a multi-level
waterfall. The result is the production of a gelatinous but robust clot made up of a mesh of fibrin—an insoluble
filamentous protein derived from fibrinogen, the plasma protein introduced earlier—in which platelets and blood
cells are trapped. Figure 18.14 summarizes the three steps of hemostasis.

FIGURE 18.14
Hemostasis
(a) An injury to a blood vessel initiates the process of hemostasis. Blood clotting involves three steps. First,
vascular spasm constricts the flow of blood. Next, a platelet plug forms to temporarily seal small openings in the vessel. Coagulation then
enables the repair of the vessel wall once the leakage of blood has stopped. (b) The synthesis of fibrin in blood clots involves either an
intrinsic pathway or an extrinsic pathway, both of which lead to a common pathway. (credit a: Kevin MacKenzie)
Clotting Factors Involved in Coagulation
In the coagulation cascade, chemicals called clotting factors (or coagulation factors) prompt reactions that activate
still more coagulation factors. The process is complex, but is initiated along two basic pathways:
•
The extrinsic pathway, which normally is triggered by trauma.
•
The intrinsic pathway, which begins in the bloodstream and is triggered by internal damage to the wall of the
vessel.
Both of these merge into a third pathway, referred to as the common pathway (see Figure 18.14b). All three
pathways are dependent upon the 12 known clotting factors, including Ca2+ and vitamin K (Table 18.1). Clotting
factors are secreted primarily by the liver and the platelets. The liver requires the fat-soluble vitamin K to produce
many of them. Vitamin K (along with biotin and folate) is somewhat unusual among vitamins in that it is not only
consumed in the diet but is also synthesized by bacteria residing in the large intestine. The calcium ion, considered
factor IV, is derived from the diet and from the breakdown of bone. Some recent evidence indicates that activation
of various clotting factors occurs on specific receptor sites on the surfaces of platelets.
The 12 clotting factors are numbered I through XIII according to the order of their discovery. Factor VI was once
believed to be a distinct clotting factor, but is now thought to be identical to factor V. Rather than renumber the
other factors, factor VI was allowed to remain as a placeholder and also a reminder that knowledge changes over
time.

Clotting Factors
Factor
number
Name
Type of
molecule
Source
Pathway(s)
I
Fibrinogen
Plasma
protein
Liver
Common; converted into fibrin
II
Prothrombin
Plasma
protein
Liver*
Common; converted into
thrombin
III
Tissue thromboplastin or tissue
factor
Lipoprotein
mixture
Damaged cells
and platelets
Extrinsic
IV
Calcium ions
Inorganic
ions in
plasma
Diet, platelets,
bone matrix
Entire process
V
Proaccelerin
Plasma
protein
Liver, platelets
Extrinsic and intrinsic
VI
Not used
Not used
Not used
Not used
VII
Proconvertin
Plasma
protein
Liver *
Extrinsic
VIII
Antihemolytic factor A
Plasma
protein
factor
Platelets and
endothelial
cells
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia A
IX
Antihemolytic factor B (plasma
thromboplastin component)
Plasma
protein
Liver*
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia B
X
Stuart–Prower factor
(thrombokinase)
Protein
Liver*
Extrinsic and intrinsic
XI
Antihemolytic factor C (plasma
thromboplastin antecedent)
Plasma
protein
Liver
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia C
TABLE 18.1 *Vitamin K required.

Factor
number
Name
Type of
molecule
Source
Pathway(s)
XII
Hageman factor
Plasma
protein
Liver
Intrinsic; initiates clotting in
vitro also activates plasmin
XIII
Fibrin-stabilizing factor
Plasma
protein
Liver, platelets
Stabilizes fibrin; slows
fibrinolysis
TABLE 18.1 *Vitamin K required.
Extrinsic Pathway
The quicker responding and more direct extrinsic pathway (also known as the tissue factor pathway) begins when
damage occurs to the surrounding tissues, such as in a traumatic injury. Upon contact with blood plasma, the
damaged extravascular cells, which are extrinsic to the bloodstream, release factor III (thromboplastin).
Sequentially, Ca2+ then factor VII (proconvertin), which is activated by factor III, are added, forming an enzyme
complex. This enzyme complex leads to activation of factor X (Stuart–Prower factor), which activates the common
pathway discussed below. The events in the extrinsic pathway are completed in a matter of seconds.
Intrinsic Pathway
The intrinsic pathway (also known as the contact activation pathway) is longer and more complex. In this case, the
factors involved are intrinsic to (present within) the bloodstream. The pathway can be prompted by damage to the
tissues, resulting from internal factors such as arterial disease; however, it is most often initiated when factor XII
(Hageman factor) comes into contact with foreign materials, such as when a blood sample is put into a glass test
tube. Within the body, factor XII is typically activated when it encounters negatively charged molecules, such as
inorganic polymers and phosphate produced earlier in the series of intrinsic pathway reactions. Factor XII sets off a
series of reactions that in turn activates factor XI (antihemolytic factor C or plasma thromboplastin antecedent) then
factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin). In the meantime, chemicals released by the platelets
increase the rate of these activation reactions. Finally, factor VIII (antihemolytic factor A) from the platelets and
endothelial cells combines with factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin) to form an enzyme
complex that activates factor X (Stuart–Prower factor or thrombokinase), leading to the common pathway. The
events in the intrinsic pathway are completed in a few minutes.
Common Pathway
Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways lead to the common pathway, in which fibrin is produced to seal off the
vessel. Once factor X has been activated by either the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway, the enzyme prothrombinase
converts factor II, the inactive enzyme prothrombin, into the active enzyme thrombin. (Note that if the enzyme
thrombin were not normally in an inactive form, clots would form spontaneously, a condition not consistent with
life.) Then, thrombin converts factor I, the soluble fibrinogen, into the insoluble fibrin protein strands. Factor XIII
then stabilizes the fibrin clot.
Fibrinolysis
The stabilized clot is acted upon by contractile proteins within the platelets. As these proteins contract, they pull on
the fibrin threads, bringing the edges of the clot more tightly together, somewhat as we do when tightening loose
shoelaces (see Figure 18.14a). This process also wrings out of the clot a small amount of fluid called serum, which
is blood plasma without its clotting factors.
To restore normal blood flow as the vessel heals, the clot must eventually be removed. Fibrinolysis is the gradual
degradation of the clot. Again, there is a fairly complicated series of reactions that involves factor XII and protein-
catabolizing enzymes. During this process, the inactive protein plasminogen is converted into the active plasmin,
which gradually breaks down the fibrin of the clot. Additionally, bradykinin, a vasodilator, is released, reversing the
effects of the serotonin and prostaglandins from the platelets. This allows the smooth muscle in the walls of the
vessels to relax and helps to restore the circulation.

Plasma Anticoagulants
An anticoagulant is any substance that opposes coagulation. Several circulating plasma anticoagulants play a role
in limiting the coagulation process to the region of injury and restoring a normal, clot-free condition of blood. For
instance, a cluster of proteins collectively referred to as the protein C system inactivates clotting factors involved in
the intrinsic pathway. TFPI (tissue factor pathway inhibitor) inhibits the conversion of the inactive factor VII to the
active form in the extrinsic pathway. Antithrombin inactivates factor X and opposes the conversion of prothrombin
(factor II) to thrombin in the common pathway. And as noted earlier, basophils release heparin, a short-acting
anticoagulant that also opposes prothrombin. Heparin is also found on the surfaces of cells lining the blood vessels.
A pharmaceutical form of heparin is often administered therapeutically, for example, in surgical patients at risk for
blood clots.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View these animations (http://openstax.org/l/coagulation) to explore the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways
that are involved the process of coagulation. The coagulation cascade restores hemostasis by activating coagulation
factors in the presence of an injury. How does the endothelium of the blood vessel walls prevent the blood from
coagulating as it flows through the blood vessels?
Disorders of Clotting
Either an insufficient or an excessive production of platelets can lead to severe disease or death. As discussed
earlier, an insufficient number of platelets, called thrombocytopenia, typically results in the inability of blood to form
clots. This can lead to excessive bleeding, even from minor wounds.
Another reason for failure of the blood to clot is the inadequate production of functional amounts of one or more
clotting factors. This is the case in the genetic disorder hemophilia, which is actually a group of related disorders,
the most common of which is hemophilia A, accounting for approximately 80 percent of cases. This disorder results
in the inability to synthesize sufficient quantities of factor VIII. Hemophilia B is the second most common form,
accounting for approximately 20 percent of cases. In this case, there is a deficiency of factor IX. Both of these
defects are linked to the X chromosome and are typically passed from a healthy (carrier) female to their male
offspring, since males are XY. Females would need to inherit a defective gene from each parent to manifest the
disease, since they are XX. Patients with hemophilia bleed from even minor internal and external wounds, and leak
blood into joint spaces after exercise and into urine and stool. Hemophilia C is a rare condition that is triggered by an
autosomal (not sex) chromosome that renders factor XI nonfunctional. It is not a true recessive condition, since
even individuals with a single copy of the mutant gene show a tendency to bleed. Regular infusions of clotting
factors isolated from healthy donors can help prevent bleeding in hemophiliac patients. At some point, genetic
therapy will become a viable option.
In contrast to the disorders characterized by coagulation failure is thrombocytosis, also mentioned earlier, a
condition characterized by excessive numbers of platelets that increases the risk for excessive clot formation, a
condition known as thrombosis. A thrombus (plural = thrombi) is an aggregation of platelets, erythrocytes, and
even WBCs typically trapped within a mass of fibrin strands. While the formation of a clot is normal following the
hemostatic mechanism just described, thrombi can form within an intact or only slightly damaged blood vessel. In a
large vessel, a thrombus will adhere to the vessel wall and decrease the flow of blood, and is referred to as a mural
thrombus. In a small vessel, it may actually totally block the flow of blood and is termed an occlusive thrombus.
Thrombi are most commonly caused by vessel damage to the endothelial lining, which activates the clotting
mechanism. These may include venous stasis, when blood in the veins, particularly in the legs, remains stationary
for long periods. This is one of the dangers of long airplane flights in crowded conditions and may lead to deep vein
thrombosis. Thrombophilia, also called hypercoagulation, is a condition in which there is a tendency to form
thrombosis. This may be familial (genetic) or acquired. Acquired forms include the autoimmune disease lupus,
immune reactions to heparin, polycythemia vera, thrombocytosis, sickle cell disease, pregnancy, and even obesity. A
thrombus can seriously impede blood flow to or from a region and will cause a local increase in blood pressure. If
flow is to be maintained, the heart will need to generate a greater pressure to overcome the resistance.
When a portion of a thrombus breaks free from the vessel wall and enters the circulation, it is referred to as an
embolus. An embolus that is carried through the bloodstream can be large enough to block a vessel critical to a
major organ. When it becomes trapped, an embolus is called an embolism. In the heart, brain, or lungs, an
embolism may accordingly cause a heart attack, a stroke, or a pulmonary embolism. These are medical
emergencies.
Among the many known biochemical activities of aspirin is its role as an anticoagulant. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
is very effective at inhibiting the aggregation of platelets. It is routinely administered during a heart attack or stroke
to reduce the adverse effects. Physicians sometimes recommend that patients at risk for cardiovascular disease
take a low dose of aspirin on a daily basis as a preventive measure. However, aspirin can also lead to serious side
effects, including increasing the risk of ulcers. A patient is well advised to consult a physician before beginning any
aspirin regimen.
A class of drugs collectively known as thrombolytic agents can help speed up the degradation of an abnormal clot. If
a thrombolytic agent is administered to a patient within 3 hours following a thrombotic stroke, the patient’s
prognosis improves significantly. However, some strokes are not caused by thrombi, but by hemorrhage. Thus, the
cause must be determined before treatment begins. Tissue plasminogen activator is an enzyme that catalyzes the
conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, the primary enzyme that breaks down clots. It is released naturally by
endothelial cells but is also used in clinical medicine. New research is progressing using compounds isolated from
the venom of some species of snakes, particularly vipers and cobras, which may eventually have therapeutic value
as thrombolytic agents.