22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the structures that make up the respiratory system
•
Describe how the respiratory system processes oxygen and CO2
•
Compare and contrast the functions of upper respiratory tract with the lower respiratory tract
The major organs of the respiratory system function primarily to provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular
respiration, remove the waste product carbon dioxide, and help to maintain acid-base balance. Portions of the
respiratory system are also used for non-vital functions, such as sensing odors, speech production, and for straining,
such as during childbirth or coughing (Figure 22.2).

FIGURE 22.2
Major Respiratory Structures
The major respiratory structures span the nasal cavity to the diaphragm.
Functionally, the respiratory system can be divided into a conducting zone and a respiratory zone. The conducting
zone of the respiratory system includes the organs and structures not directly involved in gas exchange. The gas
exchange occurs in the respiratory zone.

Conducting Zone
The major functions of the conducting zone are to provide a route for incoming and outgoing air, remove debris and
pathogens from the incoming air, and warm and humidify the incoming air. Several structures within the conducting
zone perform other functions as well. The epithelium of the nasal passages, for example, is essential to sensing
odors, and the bronchial epithelium that lines the lungs can metabolize some airborne carcinogens.

The Nose and its Adjacent Structures
The major entrance and exit for the respiratory system is through the nose. When discussing the nose, it is helpful to
divide it into two major sections: the external nose, and the nasal cavity or internal nose.
The external nose consists of the surface and skeletal structures that result in the outward appearance of the nose
and contribute to its numerous functions (Figure 22.3). The root is the region of the nose located between the
eyebrows. The bridge is the part of the nose that connects the root to the rest of the nose. The dorsum nasi is the
length of the nose. The apex is the tip of the nose. On either side of the apex, the nostrils are formed by the alae
(singular = ala). An ala is a cartilaginous structure that forms the lateral side of each naris (plural = nares), or nostril
opening. The philtrum is the concave surface that connects the apex of the nose to the upper lip.

FIGURE 22.3
Nose
This illustration shows features of the external nose (top) and skeletal features of the nose (bottom).

Underneath the thin skin of the nose are its skeletal features (see Figure 22.3, lower illustration). While the root and
bridge of the nose consist of bone, the protruding portion of the nose is composed of cartilage. As a result, when
looking at a skull, the nose is missing. The nasal bone is one of a pair of bones that lies under the root and bridge of
the nose. The nasal bone articulates superiorly with the frontal bone and laterally with the maxillary bones. Septal
cartilage is flexible hyaline cartilage connected to the nasal bone, forming the dorsum nasi. The alar cartilage
consists of the apex of the nose; it surrounds the naris.
The nares open into the nasal cavity, which is separated into left and right sections by the nasal septum (Figure
22.4). The nasal septum is formed anteriorly by a portion of the septal cartilage (the flexible portion you can touch
with your fingers) and posteriorly by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone (a cranial bone located just
posterior to the nasal bones) and the thin vomer bones (whose name refers to its plough shape). Each lateral wall of
the nasal cavity has three bony projections, called the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae. The inferior
conchae are separate bones, whereas the superior and middle conchae are portions of the ethmoid bone. Conchae
serve to increase the surface area of the nasal cavity and to disrupt the flow of air as it enters the nose, causing air
to bounce along the epithelium, where it is cleaned and warmed. The conchae and meatuses also conserve water
and prevent dehydration of the nasal epithelium by trapping water during exhalation. The floor of the nasal cavity is
composed of the palate. The hard palate at the anterior region of the nasal cavity is composed of bone. The soft
palate at the posterior portion of the nasal cavity consists of muscle tissue. Air exits the nasal cavities via the
internal nares and moves into the pharynx.

FIGURE 22.4
Upper Airway

Several bones that help form the walls of the nasal cavity have air-containing spaces called the paranasal sinuses,
which serve to warm and humidify incoming air. Sinuses are lined with a mucosa. Each paranasal sinus is named for
its associated bone: frontal sinus, maxillary sinus, sphenoidal sinus, and ethmoidal sinus. The sinuses produce
mucus and lighten the weight of the skull.
The nares and anterior portion of the nasal cavities are lined with mucous membranes, containing sebaceous glands
and hair follicles that serve to prevent the passage of large debris, such as dirt, through the nasal cavity. An olfactory
epithelium used to detect odors is found deeper in the nasal cavity.
The conchae, meatuses, and paranasal sinuses are lined by respiratory epithelium composed of pseudostratified
ciliated columnar epithelium (Figure 22.5). The epithelium contains goblet cells, one of the specialized, columnar
epithelial cells that produce mucus to trap debris. The cilia of the respiratory epithelium help remove the mucus and
debris from the nasal cavity with a constant beating motion, sweeping materials towards the throat to be swallowed.
Interestingly, cold air slows the movement of the cilia, resulting in accumulation of mucus that may in turn lead to a
runny nose during cold weather. This moist epithelium functions to warm and humidify incoming air. Capillaries
located just beneath the nasal epithelium warm the air by convection. Serous and mucus-producing cells also
secrete the lysozyme enzyme and proteins called defensins, which have antibacterial properties. Immune cells that
patrol the connective tissue deep to the respiratory epithelium provide additional protection.

FIGURE 22.5
Pseudostratified Ciliated Columnar Epithelium
Respiratory epithelium is pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium.
Seromucous glands provide lubricating mucus. LM × 680. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
2012)

INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/pseudoMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.

Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube formed by skeletal muscle and lined by mucous membrane that is continuous with that of the
nasal cavities (see Figure 22.4). The pharynx is divided into three major regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx,
and the laryngopharynx (Figure 22.6).

FIGURE 22.6
Divisions of the Pharynx
The pharynx is divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the laryngopharynx.

The nasopharynx is flanked by the conchae of the nasal cavity, and it serves only as an airway. At the top of the
nasopharynx are the pharyngeal tonsils. A pharyngeal tonsil, also called an adenoid, is an aggregate of lymphoid
reticular tissue similar to a lymph node that lies at the superior portion of the nasopharynx. The function of the
pharyngeal tonsil is not well understood, but it contains a rich supply of lymphocytes and is covered with ciliated
epithelium that traps and destroys invading pathogens that enter during inhalation. The pharyngeal tonsils are large
in children, but interestingly, tend to regress with age and may even disappear. The uvula is a small bulbous,
teardrop-shaped structure located at the apex of the soft palate. Both the uvula and soft palate move like a
pendulum during swallowing, swinging upward to close off the nasopharynx to prevent ingested materials from
entering the nasal cavity. In addition, auditory (Eustachian) tubes that connect to each middle ear cavity open into
the nasopharynx. This connection is why colds often lead to ear infections.
The oropharynx is a passageway for both air and food. The oropharynx is bordered superiorly by the nasopharynx
and anteriorly by the oral cavity. The fauces is the opening at the connection between the oral cavity and the
oropharynx. As the nasopharynx becomes the oropharynx, the epithelium changes from pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium to stratified squamous epithelium. The oropharynx contains two distinct sets of tonsils, the
palatine and lingual tonsils. A palatine tonsil is one of a pair of structures located laterally in the oropharynx in the
area of the fauces. The lingual tonsil is located at the base of the tongue. Similar to the pharyngeal tonsil, the
palatine and lingual tonsils are composed of lymphoid tissue, and trap and destroy pathogens entering the body
through the oral or nasal cavities.
The laryngopharynx is inferior to the oropharynx and posterior to the larynx. It continues the route for ingested
material and air until its inferior end, where the digestive and respiratory systems diverge. The stratified squamous
epithelium of the oropharynx is continuous with the laryngopharynx. Anteriorly, the laryngopharynx opens into the
larynx, whereas posteriorly, it enters the esophagus.

Larynx
The larynx is a cartilaginous structure inferior to the laryngopharynx that connects the pharynx to the trachea and
helps regulate the volume of air that enters and leaves the lungs (Figure 22.7). The structure of the larynx is formed
by several pieces of cartilage. Three large cartilage pieces—the thyroid cartilage (anterior), epiglottis (superior), and
cricoid cartilage (inferior)—form the major structure of the larynx. The thyroid cartilage is the largest piece of
cartilage that makes up the larynx. The thyroid cartilage consists of the laryngeal prominence, or “Adam’s apple,”
which tends to be more prominent in males. The thick cricoid cartilage forms a ring, with a wide posterior region
and a thinner anterior region. Three smaller, paired cartilages—the arytenoids, corniculates, and cuneiforms—attach
to the epiglottis and the vocal cords and muscle that help move the vocal cords to produce speech.

FIGURE 22.7
Larynx
The larynx extends from the laryngopharynx and the hyoid bone to the trachea.

The epiglottis, attached to the thyroid cartilage, is a very flexible piece of elastic cartilage that covers the opening of
the trachea (see Figure 22.4). When in the “closed” position, the unattached end of the epiglottis rests on the
glottis. The glottis is composed of the vestibular folds, the true vocal cords, and the space between these folds
(Figure 22.8). A vestibular fold, or false vocal cord, is one of a pair of folded sections of mucous membrane. A true
vocal cord is one of the white, membranous folds attached by muscle to the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages of the
larynx on their outer edges. The inner edges of the true vocal cords are free, allowing oscillation to produce sound.
The size of the membranous folds of the true vocal cords differs between individuals, producing voices with different
pitch ranges. Folds in males tend to be larger than those in females, which create a deeper voice. The act of
swallowing causes the pharynx and larynx to lift upward, allowing the pharynx to expand and the epiglottis of the
larynx to swing downward, closing the opening to the trachea. These movements produce a larger area for food to
pass through, while preventing food and beverages from entering the trachea.

FIGURE 22.8
Vocal Cords
The true vocal cords and vestibular folds of the larynx are viewed inferiorly from the laryngopharynx.

Continuous with the laryngopharynx, the superior portion of the larynx is lined with stratified squamous epithelium,
transitioning into pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium that contains goblet cells. Similar to the nasal cavity
and nasopharynx, this specialized epithelium produces mucus to trap debris and pathogens as they enter the
trachea. The cilia beat the mucus upward towards the laryngopharynx, where it can be swallowed down the
esophagus.

Trachea
The trachea (windpipe) extends from the larynx toward the lungs (Figure 22.9a). The trachea is formed by 16 to 20
stacked, C-shaped pieces of hyaline cartilage that are connected by dense connective tissue. The trachealis muscle
and elastic connective tissue together form the fibroelastic membrane, a flexible membrane that closes the
posterior surface of the trachea, connecting the C-shaped cartilages. The fibroelastic membrane allows the trachea
to stretch and expand slightly during inhalation and exhalation, whereas the rings of cartilage provide structural
support and prevent the trachea from collapsing. In addition, the trachealis muscle can be contracted to force air
through the trachea during exhalation. The trachea is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium,
which is continuous with the larynx. The esophagus borders the trachea posteriorly.

FIGURE 22.9
Trachea
(a) The tracheal tube is formed by stacked, C-shaped pieces of hyaline cartilage. (b) The layer visible in this
cross-section of tracheal wall tissue between the hyaline cartilage and the lumen of the trachea is the mucosa, which is composed of
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium that contains goblet cells. LM × 1220. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)

Bronchial Tree
The trachea branches into the right and left primary bronchi at the carina. These bronchi are also lined by
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium containing mucus-producing goblet cells (Figure 22.9b). The carina is
a raised structure that contains specialized nervous tissue that induces violent coughing if a foreign body, such as
food, is present. Rings of cartilage, similar to those of the trachea, support the structure of the bronchi and prevent
their collapse. The primary bronchi enter the lungs at the hilum, a concave region where blood vessels, lymphatic
vessels, and nerves also enter the lungs. The bronchi continue to branch into a bronchial tree. A bronchial tree (or
respiratory tree) is the collective term used for these multiple-branched bronchi. The main function of the bronchi,
like other conducting zone structures, is to provide a passageway for air to move into and out of each lung. In
addition, the mucous membrane traps debris and pathogens.
A bronchiole branches from the tertiary bronchi. Bronchioles, which are about 1 mm in diameter, further branch
until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles, which lead to the structures of gas exchange. There are more than
1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung. The muscular walls of the bronchioles do not contain cartilage like those of
the bronchi. This muscular wall can change the size of the tubing to increase or decrease airflow through the tube.

Respiratory Zone
In contrast to the conducting zone, the respiratory zone includes structures that are directly involved in gas
exchange. The respiratory zone begins where the terminal bronchioles join a respiratory bronchiole, the smallest
type of bronchiole (Figure 22.10), which then leads to an alveolar duct, opening into a cluster of alveoli.

FIGURE 22.10
Respiratory Zone
Bronchioles lead to alveolar sacs in the respiratory zone, where gas exchange occurs.

Alveoli
An alveolar duct is a tube composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue, which opens into a cluster of alveoli.
An alveolus is one of the many small, grape-like sacs that are attached to the alveolar ducts.
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus is
approximately 200 μm in diameter with elastic walls that allow the alveolus to stretch during air intake, which
greatly increases the surface area available for gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbors by alveolar
pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli and lung (Figure 22.11).

FIGURE 22.11
Structures of the Respiratory Zone
(a) The alveolus is responsible for gas exchange. (b) A micrograph shows the
alveolar structures within lung tissue. LM × 178. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

The alveolar wall consists of three major cell types: type I alveolar cells, type II alveolar cells, and alveolar
macrophages. A type I alveolar cell is a squamous epithelial cell of the alveoli, which constitute up to 97 percent of
the alveolar surface area. These cells are about 25 nm thick and are highly permeable to gases. A type II alveolar
cell is interspersed among the type I cells and secretes pulmonary surfactant, a substance composed of
phospholipids and proteins that reduces the surface tension of the alveoli. Roaming around the alveolar wall is the
alveolar macrophage, a phagocytic cell of the immune system that removes debris and pathogens that have
reached the alveoli.
The simple squamous epithelium formed by type I alveolar cells is attached to a thin, elastic basement membrane.
This epithelium is extremely thin and borders the endothelial membrane of capillaries. Taken together, the alveoli
and capillary membranes form a respiratory membrane that is approximately 0.5 μm (micrometers) thick. The
respiratory membrane allows gases to cross by simple diffusion, allowing oxygen to be picked up by the blood for
transport and CO2 to be released into the air of the alveoli.

Diseases of the…
Respiratory System: Asthma
Asthma is common condition that affects the lungs in both adults and children.
Approximately 8.2 percent of adults (18.7 million) and 9.4 percent of children (7 million) in the United States
suffer from asthma. In addition, asthma is the most frequent cause of hospitalization in children.
Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation and edema of the airway, and bronchospasms (that
is, constriction of the bronchioles), which can inhibit air from entering the lungs. In addition, excessive mucus
secretion can occur, which further contributes to airway occlusion (Figure 22.12). Cells of the immune system,
such as eosinophils and mononuclear cells, may also be involved in infiltrating the walls of the bronchi and
bronchioles.
Bronchospasms occur periodically and lead to an “asthma attack.” An attack may be triggered by environmental
factors such as dust, pollen, pet hair, or dander, changes in the weather, mold, tobacco smoke, and respiratory
infections, or by exercise and stress.

Symptoms of an asthma attack involve coughing, shortness of breath, wheezing, and tightness of the chest.
Symptoms of a severe asthma attack that requires immediate medical attention would include difficulty
breathing that results in blue (cyanotic) lips or face, confusion, drowsiness, a rapid pulse, sweating, and severe
anxiety. The severity of the condition, frequency of attacks, and identified triggers influence the type of
medication that an individual may require. Longer-term treatments are used for those with more severe asthma.
Short-term, fast-acting drugs that are used to treat an asthma attack are typically administered via an inhaler.
For young children or individuals who have difficulty using an inhaler, asthma medications can be administered
via a nebulizer.
In many cases, the underlying cause of the condition is unknown. However, recent research has demonstrated
that certain viruses, such as human rhinovirus C (HRVC), and the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae and
Chlamydia pneumoniae that are contracted in infancy or early childhood, may contribute to the development of
many cases of asthma.

FIGURE 22.12
Normal and Bronchial Asthma Tissues
(a) Normal lung tissue does not have the characteristics of lung tissue
during (b) an asthma attack, which include thickened mucosa, increased mucus-producing goblet cells, and eosinophil infiltrates.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/asthma) to learn more about what happens during an asthma attack. What are
the three changes that occur inside the airways during an asthma attack?