22.6 Modifications in Respiratory Functions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define the terms hyperpnea and hyperventilation
•
Describe the effect of exercise on the respiratory system
•
Describe the effect of high altitude on the respiratory system
•
Discuss the process of acclimatization
At rest, the respiratory system performs its functions at a constant, rhythmic pace, as regulated by the respiratory
centers of the brain. At this pace, ventilation provides sufficient oxygen to all the tissues of the body. However, there
are times that the respiratory system must alter the pace of its functions in order to accommodate the oxygen
demands of the body.

Hyperpnea
Hyperpnea is an increased depth and rate of ventilation to meet an increase in oxygen demand as might be seen in
exercise or disease, particularly diseases that target the respiratory or digestive tracts. This does not significantly
alter blood oxygen or carbon dioxide levels, but merely increases the depth and rate of ventilation to meet the
demand of the cells. In contrast, hyperventilation is an increased ventilation rate that is independent of the cellular
oxygen needs and leads to abnormally low blood carbon dioxide levels and high (alkaline) blood pH.
Interestingly, exercise does not cause hyperpnea as one might think. Muscles that perform work during exercise do
increase their demand for oxygen, stimulating an increase in ventilation. However, hyperpnea during exercise
appears to occur before a drop in oxygen levels within the muscles can occur. Therefore, hyperpnea must be driven
by other mechanisms, either instead of or in addition to a drop in oxygen levels. The exact mechanisms behind
exercise hyperpnea are not well understood, and some hypotheses are somewhat controversial. However, in
addition to low oxygen, high carbon dioxide, and low pH levels, there appears to be a complex interplay of factors
related to the nervous system and the respiratory centers of the brain.
First, a conscious decision to partake in exercise, or another form of physical exertion, results in a psychological
stimulus that may trigger the respiratory centers of the brain to increase ventilation. In addition, the respiratory
centers of the brain may be stimulated through the activation of motor neurons that innervate muscle groups that
are involved in the physical activity. Finally, physical exertion stimulates proprioceptors, which are receptors located
within the muscles, joints, and tendons, which sense movement and stretching; proprioceptors thus create a
stimulus that may also trigger the respiratory centers of the brain. These neural factors are consistent with the
sudden increase in ventilation that is observed immediately as exercise begins. Because the respiratory centers are
stimulated by psychological, motor neuron, and proprioceptor inputs throughout exercise, the fact that there is also
a sudden decrease in ventilation immediately after the exercise ends when these neural stimuli cease, further
supports the idea that they are involved in triggering the changes of ventilation.

High Altitude Effects
An increase in altitude results in a decrease in atmospheric pressure. Although the proportion of oxygen relative to
gases in the atmosphere remains at 21 percent, its partial pressure decreases (Table 22.4). As a result, it is more
difficult for a body to achieve the same level of oxygen saturation at high altitude than at low altitude, due to lower
atmospheric pressure. In fact, hemoglobin saturation is lower at high altitudes compared to hemoglobin saturation
at sea level. For example, hemoglobin saturation is about 67 percent at 19,000 feet above sea level, whereas it
reaches about 98 percent at sea level.

Partial Pressure of Oxygen at Different Altitudes
Example location
Altitude (feet above
sea level)
Atmospheric pressure
(mm Hg)
Partial pressure of oxygen
(mm Hg)
New York City, New
York
0
760
159
Boulder, Colorado
5000
632
133
Aspen, Colorado
8000
565
118
Pike’s Peak, Colorado
14,000
447
94
Denali (Mt. McKinley),
Alaska
20,000
350
73
Mt. Everest, Tibet
29,000
260
54
TABLE 22.4

As you recall, partial pressure is extremely important in determining how much gas can cross the respiratory
membrane and enter the blood of the pulmonary capillaries. A lower partial pressure of oxygen means that there is a
smaller difference in partial pressures between the alveoli and the blood, so less oxygen crosses the respiratory
membrane. As a result, fewer oxygen molecules are bound by hemoglobin. Despite this, the tissues of the body still
receive a sufficient amount of oxygen during rest at high altitudes. This is due to two major mechanisms. First, the
number of oxygen molecules that enter the tissue from the blood is nearly equal between sea level and high
altitudes. At sea level, hemoglobin saturation is higher, but only a quarter of the oxygen molecules are actually
released into the tissue. At high altitudes, a greater proportion of molecules of oxygen are released into the tissues.
Secondly, at high altitudes, a greater amount of BPG is produced by erythrocytes, which enhances the dissociation
of oxygen from hemoglobin. Physical exertion, such as skiing or hiking, can lead to altitude sickness due to the low
amount of oxygen reserves in the blood at high altitudes. At sea level, there is a large amount of oxygen reserve in
venous blood (even though venous blood is thought of as “deoxygenated”) from which the muscles can draw during
physical exertion. Because the oxygen saturation is much lower at higher altitudes, this venous reserve is small,
resulting in pathological symptoms of low blood oxygen levels. You may have heard that it is important to drink more
water when traveling at higher altitudes than you are accustomed to. This is because your body will increase
micturition (urination) at high altitudes to counteract the effects of lower oxygen levels. By removing fluids, blood
plasma levels drop but not the total number of erythrocytes. In this way, the overall concentration of erythrocytes in
the blood increases, which helps tissues obtain the oxygen they need.
Acute mountain sickness (AMS), or altitude sickness, is a condition that results from acute exposure to high
altitudes due to a low partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes. AMS typically can occur at 2400 meters (8000
feet) above sea level. AMS is a result of low blood oxygen levels, as the body has acute difficulty adjusting to the low
partial pressure of oxygen. In serious cases, AMS can cause pulmonary or cerebral edema. Symptoms of AMS
include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, lightheadedness, drowsiness, feeling disoriented, increased pulse, and
nosebleeds. The only treatment for AMS is descending to a lower altitude; however, pharmacologic treatments and
supplemental oxygen can improve symptoms. AMS can be prevented by slowly ascending to the desired altitude,
allowing the body to acclimate, as well as maintaining proper hydration.

Acclimatization
Especially in situations where the ascent occurs too quickly, traveling to areas of high altitude can cause AMS.
Acclimatization is the process of adjustment that the respiratory system makes due to chronic exposure to a high
altitude. Over a period of time, the body adjusts to accommodate the lower partial pressure of oxygen. The low
partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes results in a lower oxygen saturation level of hemoglobin in the blood. In
turn, the tissue levels of oxygen are also lower. As a result, the kidneys are stimulated to produce the hormone
erythropoietin (EPO), which stimulates the production of erythrocytes, resulting in a greater number of circulating
erythrocytes in an individual at a high altitude over a long period. With more red blood cells, there is more
hemoglobin to help transport the available oxygen. Even though there is low saturation of each hemoglobin
molecule, there will be more hemoglobin present, and therefore more oxygen in the blood. Over time, this allows the
person to partake in physical exertion without developing AMS.
