3.1 The Cell Membrane
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the molecular components that make up the cell membrane
•
Explain the major features and properties of the cell membrane
•
Differentiate between materials that can and cannot diffuse through the lipid bilayer
•
Compare and contrast different types of passive transport with active transport, providing examples of each
Despite differences in structure and function, all living cells in multicellular organisms have a surrounding cell
membrane. As the outer layer of your skin separates your body from its environment, the cell membrane (also
known as the plasma membrane) separates the inner contents of a cell from its exterior environment. This cell
membrane provides a protective barrier around the cell and regulates which materials can pass in or out.
Structure and Composition of the Cell Membrane
The cell membrane is an extremely pliable structure composed primarily of back-to-back phospholipids (a
“bilayer”). Cholesterol is also present, which contributes to the fluidity of the membrane, and there are various
proteins embedded within the membrane that have a variety of functions.
A single phospholipid molecule has a phosphate group on one end, called the “head,” and two side-by-side chains
of fatty acids that make up the lipid tails (Figure 3.2). The phosphate group is negatively charged, making the head
polar and hydrophilic—or “water loving.” A hydrophilic molecule (or region of a molecule) is one that is attracted to
water. The phosphate heads are thus attracted to the water molecules of both the extracellular and intracellular
environments. The lipid tails, on the other hand, are uncharged, or nonpolar, and are hydrophobic—or “water
fearing.” A hydrophobic molecule (or region of a molecule) repels and is repelled by water. Some lipid tails consist
of saturated fatty acids and some contain unsaturated fatty acids. This combination adds to the fluidity of the tails
that are constantly in motion. Phospholipids are thus amphipathic molecules. An amphipathic molecule is one that
contains both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic region. In fact, soap works to remove oil and grease stains because it
has amphipathic properties. The hydrophilic portion can dissolve in water while the hydrophobic portion can trap
grease in micelles that then can be washed away.

FIGURE 3.2
Phospholipid Structure
A phospholipid molecule consists of a polar phosphate “head,” which is hydrophilic and a non-
polar lipid “tail,” which is hydrophobic. Unsaturated fatty acids result in kinks in the hydrophobic tails.
The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of phospholipids. The lipid tails of one layer face the lipid tails of
the other layer, meeting at the interface of the two layers. The phospholipid heads face outward, one layer exposed
to the interior of the cell and one layer exposed to the exterior (Figure 3.3). Because the phosphate groups are polar
and hydrophilic, they are attracted to water in the intracellular fluid. Intracellular fluid (ICF) is the fluid interior of
the cell. The phosphate groups are also attracted to the extracellular fluid. Extracellular fluid (ECF) is the fluid
environment outside the enclosure of the cell membrane. Interstitial fluid (IF) is the term given to extracellular
fluid not contained within blood vessels. Because the lipid tails are hydrophobic, they meet in the inner region of the
membrane, excluding watery intracellular and extracellular fluid from this space. The cell membrane has many
proteins, as well as other lipids (such as cholesterol), that are associated with the phospholipid bilayer. An important
feature of the membrane is that it remains fluid; the lipids and proteins in the cell membrane are not rigidly locked in
place.
FIGURE 3.3
Phospholipid Bilayer
The phospholipid bilayer consists of two adjacent sheets of phospholipids, arranged tail to tail. The
hydrophobic tails associate with one another, forming the interior of the membrane. The polar heads contact the fluid inside and outside of
the cell.
Membrane Proteins
The lipid bilayer forms the basis of the cell membrane, but it is peppered throughout with various proteins. Two
different types of proteins that are commonly associated with the cell membrane are the integral proteins and
peripheral protein (Figure 3.4). As its name suggests, an integral protein is a protein that is embedded in the
membrane. A channel protein is an example of an integral protein that selectively allows particular materials, such
as certain ions, to pass into or out of the cell.

FIGURE 3.4
Cell Membrane
The cell membrane of the cell is a phospholipid bilayer containing many different molecular components,
including proteins and cholesterol, some with carbohydrate groups attached.
Another important group of integral proteins are cell recognition proteins, which serve to mark a cell’s identity so
that it can be recognized by other cells. A receptor is a type of recognition protein that can selectively bind a specific
molecule outside the cell, and this binding induces a chemical reaction within the cell. A ligand is the specific
molecule that binds to and activates a receptor. Some integral proteins serve dual roles as both a receptor and an
ion channel. One example of a receptor-ligand interaction is the receptors on nerve cells that bind
neurotransmitters, such as dopamine. When a dopamine molecule binds to a dopamine receptor protein, a channel
within the transmembrane protein opens to allow certain ions to flow into the cell.
Some integral membrane proteins are glycoproteins. A glycoprotein is a protein that has carbohydrate molecules
attached, which extend into the extracellular matrix. The attached carbohydrate tags on glycoproteins aid in cell
recognition. The carbohydrates that extend from membrane proteins and even from some membrane lipids
collectively form the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx is a fuzzy-appearing coating around the cell formed from
glycoproteins and other carbohydrates attached to the cell membrane. The glycocalyx can have various roles. For
example, it may have molecules that allow the cell to bind to another cell, it may contain receptors for hormones, or
it might have enzymes to break down nutrients. The glycocalyces found in a person’s body are products of that
person’s genetic makeup. They give each of the individual’s trillions of cells the “identity” of belonging in the
person’s body. This identity is the primary way that a person’s immune defense cells “know” not to attack the
person’s own body cells, but it also is the reason organs donated by another person might be rejected.
Peripheral proteins are typically found on the inner or outer surface of the lipid bilayer but can also be attached to
the internal or external surface of an integral protein. These proteins typically perform a specific function for the
cell. Some peripheral proteins on the surface of intestinal cells, for example, act as digestive enzymes to break down
nutrients to sizes that can pass through the cells and into the bloodstream.

Transport across the Cell Membrane
One of the great wonders of the cell membrane is its ability to regulate the concentration of substances inside the
cell. These substances include ions such as Ca++, Na+, K+, and Cl–; nutrients including sugars, fatty acids, and amino
acids; and waste products, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2), which must leave the cell.
The membrane’s lipid bilayer structure provides the first level of control. The phospholipids are tightly packed
together, and the membrane has a hydrophobic interior. This structure causes the membrane to be selectively
permeable. A membrane that has selective permeability allows only substances meeting certain criteria to pass
through it unaided. In the case of the cell membrane, only relatively small, nonpolar materials can move through the
lipid bilayer (remember, the lipid tails of the membrane are nonpolar). Some examples of these are other lipids,
oxygen and carbon dioxide gases, and alcohol. However, water-soluble materials—like glucose, amino acids, and
electrolytes—need some assistance to cross the membrane because they are repelled by the hydrophobic tails of
the phospholipid bilayer. All substances that move through the membrane do so by one of two general methods,
which are categorized based on whether or not energy is required. Passive transport is the movement of

substances across the membrane without the expenditure of cellular energy. In contrast, active transport is the
movement of substances across the membrane using energy from adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Passive Transport
In order to understand how substances move passively across a cell membrane, it is necessary to understand
concentration gradients and diffusion. A concentration gradient is the difference in concentration of a substance
across a space. Molecules (or ions) will spread/diffuse from where they are more concentrated to where they are
less concentrated until they are equally distributed in that space. (When molecules move in this way, they are said to
move down their concentration gradient.) Diffusion is the movement of particles from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration. A couple of common examples will help to illustrate this concept.
Imagine being inside a closed bathroom. If a bottle of perfume were sprayed, the scent molecules would naturally
diffuse from the spot where they left the bottle to all corners of the bathroom, and this diffusion would go on until no
more concentration gradient remains. Another example is a spoonful of sugar placed in a cup of tea. Eventually the
sugar will diffuse throughout the tea until no concentration gradient remains. In both cases, if the room is warmer or
the tea hotter, diffusion occurs even faster as the molecules are bumping into each other and spreading out faster
than at cooler temperatures. Having an internal body temperature around 98.6° F thus also aids in diffusion of
particles within the body.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/diffusion) to see diffusion and how it is propelled by the kinetic energy of
molecules in solution. How does temperature affect diffusion rate, and why?
Whenever a substance exists in greater concentration on one side of a semipermeable membrane, such as the cell
membranes, any substance that can move down its concentration gradient across the membrane will do so.
Consider substances that can easily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane, such as the gases oxygen
(O2) and CO2. O2 generally diffuses into cells because it is more concentrated outside of them, and CO2 typically
diffuses out of cells because it is more concentrated inside of them. Neither of these examples requires any energy
on the part of the cell, and therefore they use passive transport to move across the membrane.
Before moving on, you need to review the gases that can diffuse across a cell membrane. Because cells rapidly use
up oxygen during metabolism, there is typically a lower concentration of O2 inside the cell than outside. As a result,
oxygen will diffuse from the interstitial fluid directly through the lipid bilayer of the membrane and into the
cytoplasm within the cell. On the other hand, because cells produce CO2 as a byproduct of metabolism, CO2
concentrations rise within the cytoplasm; therefore, CO2 will move from the cell through the lipid bilayer and into the
interstitial fluid, where its concentration is lower. This mechanism of molecules moving across a cell membrane
from the side where they are more concentrated to the side where they are less concentrated is a form of passive
transport called simple diffusion (Figure 3.5).
FIGURE 3.5
Simple Diffusion across the Cell (Plasma) Membrane
The structure of the lipid bilayer allows small, uncharged
substances such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, and hydrophobic molecules such as lipids, to pass through the cell membrane, down their
concentration gradient, by simple diffusion.
Large polar or ionic molecules, which are hydrophilic, cannot easily cross the phospholipid bilayer. Very small polar
molecules, such as water, can cross via simple diffusion due to their small size. Charged atoms or molecules of any
size cannot cross the cell membrane via simple diffusion as the charges are repelled by the hydrophobic tails in the
interior of the phospholipid bilayer. Solutes dissolved in water on either side of the cell membrane will tend to
diffuse down their concentration gradients, but because most substances cannot pass freely through the lipid
bilayer of the cell membrane, their movement is restricted to protein channels and specialized transport
mechanisms in the membrane. Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion process used for those substances that cannot
cross the lipid bilayer due to their size, charge, and/or polarity (Figure 3.6). A common example of facilitated
diffusion is the movement of glucose into the cell, where it is used to make ATP. Although glucose can be more
concentrated outside of a cell, it cannot cross the lipid bilayer via simple diffusion because it is both large and polar.
To resolve this, a specialized carrier protein called the glucose transporter will transfer glucose molecules into the
cell to facilitate its inward diffusion.
FIGURE 3.6
Facilitated Diffusion
(a) Facilitated diffusion of substances crossing the cell (plasma) membrane takes place with the help
of proteins such as channel proteins and carrier proteins. Channel proteins are less selective than carrier proteins, and usually mildly
discriminate between their cargo based on size and charge. (b) Carrier proteins are more selective, often only allowing one particular type
of molecule to cross.
As an example, even though sodium ions (Na+) are highly concentrated outside of cells, these electrolytes are
charged and cannot pass through the nonpolar lipid bilayer of the membrane. Their diffusion is facilitated by
membrane proteins that form sodium channels (or “pores”), so that Na+ ions can move down their concentration
gradient from outside the cells to inside the cells. There are many other solutes that must undergo facilitated
diffusion to move into a cell, such as amino acids, or to move out of a cell, such as wastes. Because facilitated
diffusion is a passive process, it does not require energy expenditure by the cell.
Water also can move freely across the cell membrane of all cells, either through protein channels or by slipping
between the lipid tails of the membrane itself. Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable
membrane (Figure 3.7).

FIGURE 3.7
Osmosis
Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane down its concentration gradient. If a
membrane is permeable to water, though not to a solute, water will equalize its own concentration by diffusing to the side of lower water
concentration (and thus the side of higher solute concentration). In the beaker on the left, the solution on the right side of the membrane is
hypertonic.
The movement of water molecules is not itself regulated by some cells, so it is important that these cells are
exposed to an environment in which the concentration of solutes outside of the cells (in the extracellular fluid) is
equal to the concentration of solutes inside the cells (in the cytoplasm). Two solutions that have the same
concentration of solutes are said to be isotonic (equal tension). When cells and their extracellular environments are
isotonic, the concentration of water molecules is the same outside and inside the cells, and the cells maintain their
normal shape (and function).
Osmosis occurs when there is an imbalance of solutes outside of a cell versus inside the cell. A solution that has a
higher concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypertonic, and water molecules tend to diffuse
into a hypertonic solution (Figure 3.8). Cells in a hypertonic solution will shrivel as water leaves the cell via osmosis.
In contrast, a solution that has a lower concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypotonic, and
water molecules tend to diffuse out of a hypotonic solution. Cells in a hypotonic solution will take on too much water
and swell, with the risk of eventually bursting. A critical aspect of homeostasis in living things is to create an internal
environment in which all of the body’s cells are in an isotonic solution. Various organ systems, particularly the
kidneys, work to maintain this homeostasis.
FIGURE 3.8
Concentration of Solutions
A hypertonic solution has a solute concentration higher than another solution. An isotonic
solution has a solute concentration equal to another solution. A hypotonic solution has a solute concentration lower than another solution.
Another mechanism besides diffusion to passively transport materials between compartments is filtration. Unlike
diffusion of a substance from where it is more concentrated to less concentrated, filtration uses a hydrostatic
pressure gradient that pushes the fluid—and the solutes within it—from a higher pressure area to a lower pressure
area. Filtration is an extremely important process in the body. For example, the circulatory system uses filtration to
move plasma and substances across the endothelial lining of capillaries and into surrounding tissues, supplying
cells with the nutrients. Filtration pressure in the kidneys provides the mechanism to remove wastes from the
bloodstream.
Active Transport
For all of the transport methods described above, the cell expends no energy. Membrane proteins that aid in the
passive transport of substances do so without the use of ATP. During active transport, ATP is required to move a
substance across a membrane, often with the help of protein carriers, and usually against its concentration gradient.
One of the most common types of active transport involves proteins that serve as pumps. The word “pump”
probably conjures up thoughts of using energy to pump up the tire of a bicycle or a basketball. Similarly, energy from
ATP is required for these membrane proteins to transport substances—molecules or ions—across the membrane,
usually against their concentration gradients (from an area of low concentration to an area of high concentration).
The sodium-potassium pump, which is also called Na+/K+ ATPase, transports sodium out of a cell while moving
potassium into the cell. The Na+/K+ pump is an important ion pump found in the membranes of many types of cells.
These pumps are particularly abundant in nerve cells, which are constantly pumping out sodium ions and pulling in
potassium ions to maintain an electrical gradient across their cell membranes. An electrical gradient is a difference
in electrical charge across a space. In the case of nerve cells, for example, the electrical gradient exists between the
inside and outside of the cell, with the inside being negatively-charged (at around -70 mV) relative to the outside.
The negative electrical gradient is maintained because each Na+/K+ pump moves three Na+ ions out of the cell and
two K+ ions into the cell for each ATP molecule that is used (Figure 3.9). This process is so important for nerve cells
that it accounts for the majority of their ATP usage.
FIGURE 3.9
Sodium-Potassium Pump
The sodium-potassium pump is found in many cell (plasma) membranes. Powered by ATP, the
pump moves sodium and potassium ions in opposite directions, each against its concentration gradient. In a single cycle of the pump, three
sodium ions are extruded from and two potassium ions are imported into the cell.
Active transport pumps can also work together with other active or passive transport systems to move substances
across the membrane. For example, the sodium-potassium pump maintains a high concentration of sodium ions
outside of the cell. Therefore, if the cell needs sodium ions, all it has to do is open a passive sodium channel, as the
concentration gradient of the sodium ions will drive them to diffuse into the cell. In this way, the action of an active
transport pump (the sodium-potassium pump) powers the passive transport of sodium ions by creating a
concentration gradient. When active transport powers the transport of another substance in this way, it is called
secondary active transport.
Symporters are secondary active transporters that move two substances in the same direction. For example, the
sodium-glucose symporter uses sodium ions to “pull” glucose molecules into the cell. Because cells store glucose
for energy, glucose is typically at a higher concentration inside of the cell than outside. However, due to the action of
the sodium-potassium pump, sodium ions will easily diffuse into the cell when the symporter is opened. The flood of
sodium ions through the symporter provides the energy that allows glucose to move through the symporter and into
the cell, against its concentration gradient.
Conversely, antiporters are secondary active transport systems that transport substances in opposite directions. For
example, the sodium-hydrogen ion antiporter uses the energy from the inward flood of sodium ions to move
hydrogen ions (H+) out of the cell. The sodium-hydrogen antiporter is used to maintain the pH of the cell's interior.
Other forms of active transport do not involve membrane carriers. Endocytosis (bringing “into the cell”) is the
process of a cell ingesting material by enveloping it in a portion of its cell membrane, and then pinching off that
portion of membrane (Figure 3.10). Once pinched off, the portion of membrane and its contents becomes an
independent, intracellular vesicle. A vesicle is a membranous sac—a spherical and hollow organelle bounded by a
lipid bilayer membrane. Endocytosis often brings materials into the cell that must be broken down or digested.

Phagocytosis (“cell eating”) is the endocytosis of large particles. Many immune cells engage in phagocytosis of
invading pathogens. Like little Pac-men, their job is to patrol body tissues for unwanted matter, such as invading
bacterial cells, phagocytize them, and digest them. In contrast to phagocytosis, pinocytosis (“cell drinking”) brings
fluid containing dissolved substances into a cell through membrane vesicles.
FIGURE 3.10
Three Forms of Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a form of active transport in which a cell envelopes extracellular materials
using its cell membrane. (a) In phagocytosis, which is relatively nonselective, the cell takes in a large particle. (b) In pinocytosis, the cell
takes in small particles in fluid. (c) In contrast, receptor-mediated endocytosis is quite selective. When external receptors bind a specific
ligand, the cell responds by endocytosing the ligand.
Phagocytosis and pinocytosis take in large portions of extracellular material, and they are typically not highly
selective in the substances they bring in. Cells regulate the endocytosis of specific substances via receptor-
mediated endocytosis. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is endocytosis by a portion of the cell membrane that
contains many receptors that are specific for a certain substance. Once the surface receptors have bound sufficient
amounts of the specific substance (the receptor’s ligand), the cell will endocytose the part of the cell membrane
containing the receptor-ligand complexes. Iron, a required component of hemoglobin, is endocytosed by red blood
cells in this way. Iron is bound to a protein called transferrin in the blood. Specific transferrin receptors on red blood
cell surfaces bind the iron-transferrin molecules, and the cell endocytoses the receptor-ligand complexes.
In contrast with endocytosis, exocytosis (taking “out of the cell”) is the process of a cell exporting material using
vesicular transport (Figure 3.11). Many cells manufacture substances that must be secreted, like a factory
manufacturing a product for export. These substances are typically packaged into membrane-bound vesicles within
the cell. When the vesicle membrane fuses with the cell membrane, the vesicle releases it contents into the
interstitial fluid. The vesicle membrane then becomes part of the cell membrane. Cells of the stomach and pancreas
produce and secrete digestive enzymes through exocytosis (Figure 3.12). Endocrine cells produce and secrete
hormones that are sent throughout the body, and certain immune cells produce and secrete large amounts of
histamine, a chemical important for immune responses.

FIGURE 3.11
Exocytosis
Exocytosis is much like endocytosis in reverse. Material destined for export is packaged into a vesicle inside
the cell. The membrane of the vesicle fuses with the cell membrane, and the contents are released into the extracellular space.
FIGURE 3.12
Pancreatic Cells' Enzyme Products
The pancreatic acinar cells produce and secrete many enzymes that digest food. The
tiny black granules in this electron micrograph are secretory vesicles filled with enzymes that will be exported from the cells via exocytosis.
LM × 2900. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/pcells) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Diseases of the…
Cell: Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (CF) affects approximately 30,000 people in the United States, with about
1,000 new cases reported each year. The genetic disease is most well known for its damage to the lungs,
causing breathing difficulties and chronic lung infections, but it also affects the liver, pancreas, and intestines.
Only about 50 years ago, the prognosis for children born with CF was very grim—a life expectancy rarely over 10
years. Today, with advances in medical treatment, many CF patients live into their 30s.
The symptoms of CF result from a malfunctioning membrane ion channel called the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR. In healthy people, the CFTR protein is an integral membrane
protein that transports Cl– ions out of the cell. In a person who has CF, the gene for the CFTR is mutated, thus,
the cell manufactures a defective channel protein that typically is not incorporated into the membrane, but is
instead degraded by the cell.
The CFTR requires ATP in order to function, making its Cl– transport a form of active transport. This
characteristic puzzled researchers for a long time because the Cl– ions are actually flowing down their
