INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 3
The Cellular Level of Organization
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the cell membrane, including its regulation of materials into and out of
the cell
•
Describe the functions of the various cytoplasmic organelles
•
Explain the structure and contents of the nucleus, as well as the process of DNA replication
•
Explain the process by which a cell builds proteins using the DNA code
•
List the stages of the cell cycle in order, including the steps of cell division in somatic cells
•
Discuss how a cell differentiates and becomes more specialized
•
List the morphological and physiological characteristics of some representative cell types in the human body
You developed from a single fertilized egg cell into the complex organism containing trillions of
cells that you see when you look in a mirror. During this developmental process, early, undifferentiated cells
differentiate and become specialized in their structure and function. These different cell types form specialized
tissues that work in concert to perform all of the functions necessary for the living organism. Cellular and
developmental biologists study how the continued division of a single cell leads to such complexity and
differentiation.
Consider the difference between a structural cell in the skin and a nerve cell. A structural skin cell may be shaped
like a flat plate (squamous) and live only for a short time before it is shed and replaced. Packed tightly into rows and
sheets, the squamous skin cells provide a protective barrier for the cells and tissues that lie beneath. A nerve cell,
on the other hand, may be shaped something like a star, sending out long processes up to a meter in length and may
live for the entire lifetime of the organism. With their long winding appendages, nerve cells can communicate with
one another and with other types of body cells and send rapid signals that inform the organism about its
environment and allow it to interact with that environment. These differences illustrate one very important theme
that is consistent at all organizational levels of biology: the form of a structure is optimally suited to perform
particular functions assigned to that structure. Keep this theme in mind as you tour the inside of a cell and are
Figure 3.1
Fluorescence-stained Cell Undergoing Mitosis A lung cell from a newt, commonly studied for its similarity to human lung
cells, is stained with fluorescent dyes. The green stain reveals mitotic spindles, red is the cell membrane and part of the cytoplasm, and the
structures that appear light blue are chromosomes. This cell is in anaphase of mitosis. (credit: “Mortadelo2005”/Wikimedia Commons)
