26.4 Acid-Base Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the most powerful buffer system in the body
•
Explain the way in which the respiratory system affects blood pH
Proper physiological functioning depends on a very tight balance between the concentrations of acids and bases in
the blood. Acid-balance balance is measured using the pH scale, as shown in Figure 26.15. A variety of buffering
systems permits blood and other bodily fluids to maintain a narrow pH range, even in the face of perturbations. A
buffer is a chemical system that prevents a radical change in fluid pH by dampening the change in hydrogen ion
concentrations in the case of excess acid or base. Most commonly, the substance that absorbs the ions is either a
weak acid, which takes up hydroxyl ions, or a weak base, which takes up hydrogen ions.

FIGURE 26.15
The pH Scale
This chart shows where many common substances fall on the pH scale.

Buffer Systems in the Body
The buffer systems in the human body are extremely efficient, and different systems work at different rates. It takes
only seconds for the chemical buffers in the blood to make adjustments to pH. The respiratory tract can adjust the
blood pH upward in minutes by exhaling CO2 from the body. The renal system can also adjust blood pH through the
excretion of hydrogen ions (H+) and the conservation of bicarbonate, but this process takes hours to days to have an
effect.
The buffer systems functioning in blood plasma include plasma proteins, phosphate, and bicarbonate and carbonic
acid buffers. The kidneys help control acid-base balance by excreting hydrogen ions and generating bicarbonate
that helps maintain blood plasma pH within a normal range. Protein buffer systems work predominantly inside cells.

Protein Buffers in Blood Plasma and Cells
Nearly all proteins can function as buffers. Proteins are made up of amino acids, which contain positively charged
amino groups and negatively charged carboxyl groups. The charged regions of these molecules can bind hydrogen
and hydroxyl ions, and thus function as buffers. Buffering by proteins accounts for two-thirds of the buffering power
of the blood and most of the buffering within cells.

Hemoglobin as a Buffer
Hemoglobin is the principal protein inside of red blood cells and accounts for one-third of the mass of the cell.
During the conversion of CO2 into bicarbonate, hydrogen ions liberated in the reaction are buffered by hemoglobin,
which is reduced by the dissociation of oxygen. This buffering helps maintain normal pH. The process is reversed in
the pulmonary capillaries to re-form CO2, which then can diffuse into the air sacs to be exhaled into the atmosphere.
This process is discussed in detail in the chapter on the respiratory system.

Phosphate Buffer
Phosphates are found in the blood in two forms: sodium dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4), which is a weak acid,
and sodium monohydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4), which is a weak base. When NaHPO4
comes into contact with a strong acid, such as HCl, the base picks up a second hydrogen ion to form the weak acid NaH2PO4
and sodium chloride, NaCl. When NaHPO4 (the weak acid) comes into contact with a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide
(NaOH), the weak acid reverts back to the weak base and produces water. Acids and bases are still present, but they
hold onto the ions.

Bicarbonate-Carbonic Acid Buffer
The bicarbonate-carbonic acid buffer works in a fashion similar to phosphate buffers. The bicarbonate is regulated
in the blood by sodium, as are the phosphate ions. When sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), comes into contact with a
strong acid, such as HCl, carbonic acid (H2CO3), which is a weak acid, and NaCl are formed. When carbonic acid
comes into contact with a strong base, such as NaOH, bicarbonate and water are formed.
As with the phosphate buffer, a weak acid or weak base captures the free ions, and a significant change in pH is
prevented. Bicarbonate ions and carbonic acid are present in the blood in a 20:1 ratio if the blood pH is within the
normal range. With 20 times more bicarbonate than carbonic acid, this capture system is most efficient at buffering
changes that would make the blood more acidic. This is useful because most of the body’s metabolic wastes, such
as lactic acid and ketone bodies, are acids. Carbonic acid levels in the blood are controlled by the expiration of CO2
through the lungs. In red blood cells, carbonic anhydrase forces the dissociation of the acid, rendering the blood
less acidic. Because of this acid dissociation, CO2 is exhaled (see equations above). The level of bicarbonate in the
blood is controlled through the renal system, where bicarbonate ions in the renal filtrate are conserved and passed
back into the blood. However, the bicarbonate buffer is the primary buffering system of the IF surrounding the cells
in tissues throughout the body.

Respiratory Regulation of Acid-Base Balance
The respiratory system contributes to the balance of acids and bases in the body by regulating the blood levels of
carbonic acid (Figure 26.16). CO2 in the blood readily reacts with water to form carbonic acid, and the levels of CO2
and carbonic acid in the blood are in equilibrium. When the CO2 level in the blood rises (as it does when you hold
your breath), the excess CO2 reacts with water to form additional carbonic acid, lowering blood pH. Increasing the
rate and/or depth of respiration (which you might feel the “urge” to do after holding your breath) allows you to
exhale more CO2. The loss of CO2 from the body reduces blood levels of carbonic acid and thereby adjusts the pH
upward, toward normal levels. As you might have surmised, this process also works in the opposite direction.
Excessive deep and rapid breathing (as in hyperventilation) rids the blood of CO2 and reduces the level of carbonic
acid, making the blood too alkaline. This brief alkalosis can be remedied by rebreathing air that has been exhaled
into a paper bag. Rebreathing exhaled air will rapidly bring blood pH down toward normal.

FIGURE 26.16
Respiratory Regulation of Blood pH
The respiratory system can reduce blood pH by removing CO2 from the blood.

The chemical reactions that regulate the levels of CO2 and carbonic acid occur in the lungs when blood travels
through the lung’s pulmonary capillaries. Minor adjustments in breathing are usually sufficient to adjust the pH of
the blood by changing how much CO2 is exhaled. In fact, doubling the respiratory rate for less than 1 minute,
removing “extra” CO2, would increase the blood pH by 0.2. This situation is common if you are exercising
strenuously over a period of time. To keep up the necessary energy production, you would produce excess CO2 (and
lactic acid if exercising beyond your aerobic threshold). In order to balance the increased acid production, the
respiration rate goes up to remove the CO2. This helps to keep you from developing acidosis.
The body regulates the respiratory rate by the use of chemoreceptors, which primarily use CO2 as a signal.
Peripheral blood sensors are found in the walls of the aorta and carotid arteries. These sensors signal the brain to
provide immediate adjustments to the respiratory rate if CO2 levels rise or fall. Yet other sensors are found in the
brain itself. Changes in the pH of CSF affect the respiratory center in the medulla oblongata, which can directly
modulate breathing rate to bring the pH back into the normal range.
Hypercapnia, or abnormally elevated blood levels of CO2, occurs in any situation that impairs respiratory functions,
including pneumonia and congestive heart failure. Reduced breathing (hypoventilation) due to drugs such as
morphine, barbiturates, or ethanol (or even just holding one’s breath) can also result in hypercapnia. Hypocapnia, or
abnormally low blood levels of CO2, occurs with any cause of hyperventilation that drives off the CO2, such as
salicylate toxicity, elevated room temperatures, fever, or hysteria.

Renal Regulation of Acid-Base Balance
The renal regulation of the body’s acid-base balance addresses the metabolic component of the buffering system.
Whereas the respiratory system (together with breathing centers in the brain) controls the blood levels of carbonic
acid by controlling the exhalation of CO2, the renal system controls the blood levels of bicarbonate. A decrease of
blood bicarbonate can result from the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase by certain diuretics or from excessive
bicarbonate loss due to diarrhea. Blood bicarbonate levels are also typically lower in people who have Addison’s
disease (chronic adrenal insufficiency), in which aldosterone levels are reduced, and in people who have renal
damage, such as chronic nephritis. Finally, low bicarbonate blood levels can result from elevated levels of ketones
(common in unmanaged diabetes mellitus), which bind bicarbonate in the filtrate and prevent its conservation.
Bicarbonate ions, HCO3-, found in the filtrate, are essential to the bicarbonate buffer system, yet the cells of the
tubule are not permeable to bicarbonate ions. The steps involved in supplying bicarbonate ions to the system are
seen in Figure 26.17 and are summarized below:
•
Step 1: Sodium ions are reabsorbed from the filtrate in exchange for H+ by an antiport mechanism in the apical
membranes of cells lining the renal tubule.
•
Step 2: The cells produce bicarbonate ions that can be shunted to peritubular capillaries.
•
Step 3: When CO2 is available, the reaction is driven to the formation of carbonic acid, which dissociates to form
a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion.
•
Step 4: The bicarbonate ion passes into the peritubular capillaries and returns to the blood. The hydrogen ion is
secreted into the filtrate, where it can become part of new water molecules and be reabsorbed as such, or
removed in the urine.

FIGURE 26.17
Conservation of Bicarbonate in the Kidney
Tubular cells are not permeable to bicarbonate; thus, bicarbonate is
conserved rather than reabsorbed. Steps 1 and 2 of bicarbonate conservation are indicated.

It is also possible that salts in the filtrate, such as sulfates, phosphates, or ammonia, will capture hydrogen ions. If
this occurs, the hydrogen ions will not be available to combine with bicarbonate ions and produce CO2. In such
cases, bicarbonate ions are not conserved from the filtrate to the blood, which will also contribute to a pH imbalance
and acidosis.
The hydrogen ions also compete with potassium to exchange with sodium in the renal tubules. If more potassium is
present than normal, potassium, rather than the hydrogen ions, will be exchanged, and increased potassium enters
the filtrate. When this occurs, fewer hydrogen ions in the filtrate participate in the conversion of bicarbonate into
CO2 and less bicarbonate is conserved. If there is less potassium, more hydrogen ions enter the filtrate to be
exchanged with sodium and more bicarbonate is conserved.
Chloride ions are important in neutralizing positive ion charges in the body. If chloride is lost, the body uses
bicarbonate ions in place of the lost chloride ions. Thus, lost chloride results in an increased reabsorption of
bicarbonate by the renal system.

Disorders of the...
Acid-Base Balance: Ketoacidosis
Diabetic acidosis, or ketoacidosis, occurs most frequently in people with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
When certain tissues in the body cannot get adequate amounts of glucose, they depend on the breakdown of
fatty acids for energy. When acetyl groups break off the fatty acid chains, the acetyl groups then non-
enzymatically combine to form ketone bodies, acetoacetic acid, beta-hydroxybutyric acid, and acetone, all of
which increase the acidity of the blood. In this condition, the brain isn’t supplied with enough of its
fuel—glucose—to produce all of the ATP it requires to function.
Ketoacidosis can be severe and, if not detected and treated properly, can lead to diabetic coma, which can be
fatal. A common early symptom of ketoacidosis is deep, rapid breathing as the body attempts to drive off CO2
and compensate for the acidosis. Another common symptom is fruity-smelling breath, due to the exhalation of
acetone. Other symptoms include dry skin and mouth, a flushed face, nausea, vomiting, and stomach pain.
Treatment for diabetic coma is ingestion or injection of sugar; its prevention is the proper daily administration of
insulin.
A person who is diabetic and uses insulin can initiate ketoacidosis if a dose of insulin is missed. Among people
with type 2 diabetes, those of Hispanic and African-American descent are more likely to go into ketoacidosis
than those of other ethnic backgrounds, although the reason for this is unknown.
