11.6 Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the appendicular muscles of the pelvic girdle and lower limb
•
Identify the movement and function of the pelvic girdle and lower limb
The appendicular muscles of the lower body position and stabilize the pelvic girdle, which serves as a foundation
for the lower limbs. Comparatively, there is much more movement at the pectoral girdle than at the pelvic girdle.
There is very little movement of the pelvic girdle because of its connection with the sacrum at the base of the axial
skeleton. The pelvic girdle is less range of motion because it was designed to stabilize and support the body.
Muscles of the Thigh
What would happen if the pelvic girdle, which attaches the lower limbs to the torso, were capable of the same range
of motion as the pectoral girdle? For one thing, walking would expend more energy if the heads of the femurs were
not secured in the acetabula of the pelvis. The body’s center of gravity is in the area of the pelvis. If the center of
gravity were not to remain fixed, standing up would be difficult as well. Therefore, what the leg muscles lack in range
of motion and versatility, they make up for in size and power, facilitating the body’s stabilization, posture, and
movement.
Gluteal Region Muscles That Move the Femur
Most muscles that insert on the femur (the thigh bone) and move it, originate on the pelvic girdle. The psoas major
and iliacus make up the iliopsoas group. Some of the largest and most powerful muscles in the body are the gluteal
muscles or gluteal group. The gluteus maximus is the largest; deep to the gluteus maximus is the gluteus medius,
and deep to the gluteus medius is the gluteus minimus, the smallest of the trio (Figure 11.29 and Figure 11.30).

FIGURE 11.29
Hip and Thigh Muscles
The large and powerful muscles of the hip that move the femur generally originate on the pelvic
girdle and insert into the femur. The muscles that move the lower leg typically originate on the femur and insert into the bones of the knee
joint. The anterior muscles of the femur extend the lower leg but also aid in flexing the thigh. The posterior muscles of the femur flex the
lower leg but also aid in extending the thigh. A combination of gluteal and thigh muscles also adduct, abduct, and rotate the thigh and lower
leg.

FIGURE 11.30
Gluteal Region Muscles That Move the Femur
The tensor fascia latae is a thick, squarish muscle in the superior aspect of the lateral thigh. It acts as a synergist of
the gluteus medius and iliopsoas in flexing and abducting the thigh. It also helps stabilize the lateral aspect of the
knee by pulling on the iliotibial tract (band), making it taut. Deep to the gluteus maximus, the piriformis, obturator
internus, obturator externus, superior gemellus, inferior gemellus, and quadratus femoris laterally rotate the
femur at the hip.
The adductor longus, adductor brevis, and adductor magnus can both medially and laterally rotate the thigh
depending on the placement of the foot. The adductor longus flexes the thigh, whereas the adductor magnus
extends it. The pectineus adducts and flexes the femur at the hip as well. The pectineus is located in the femoral
triangle, which is formed at the junction between the hip and the leg and also includes the femoral nerve, the
femoral artery, the femoral vein, and the deep inguinal lymph nodes.
Thigh Muscles That Move the Femur, Tibia, and Fibula
Deep fascia in the thigh separates it into medial, anterior, and posterior compartments (see Figure 11.29 and Figure
11.31). The muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh are responsible for adducting the femur at the hip.
Along with the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, and pectineus, the strap-like gracilis adducts
the thigh in addition to flexing the leg at the knee.

FIGURE 11.31
Thigh Muscles That Move the Femur, Tibia, and Fibula
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the thigh flex the thigh and extend the leg. This compartment
contains the quadriceps femoris group, which actually comprises four muscles that extend and stabilize the knee.
The rectus femoris is on the anterior aspect of the thigh, the vastus lateralis is on the lateral aspect of the thigh,
the vastus medialis is on the medial aspect of the thigh, and the vastus intermedius is between the vastus lateralis
and vastus medialis and deep to the rectus femoris. The tendon common to all four is the quadriceps tendon
(patellar tendon), which inserts into the patella and continues below it as the patellar ligament. The patellar
ligament attaches to the tibial tuberosity. In addition to the quadriceps femoris, the sartorius is a band-like muscle
that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side of the proximal tibia. This versatile muscle
flexes the leg at the knee and flexes, abducts, and laterally rotates the leg at the hip. This muscle allows us to sit
cross-legged.
The posterior compartment of the thigh includes muscles that flex the leg and extend the thigh. The three long
muscles on the back of the knee are the hamstring group, which flexes the knee. These are the biceps femoris,
semitendinosus, and semimembranosus. The tendons of these muscles form the popliteal fossa, the diamond-
shaped space at the back of the knee.
Muscles That Move the Feet and Toes
Similar to the thigh muscles, the muscles of the leg are divided by deep fascia into compartments, although the leg
has three: anterior, lateral, and posterior (Figure 11.32 and Figure 11.33).
FIGURE 11.32
Muscles of the Lower Leg
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for
dorsiflexion, and the muscles of the posterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for plantar flexion. The lateral and
medial muscles in both compartments invert, evert, and rotate the foot.

FIGURE 11.33
Muscles That Move the Feet and Toes
The muscles in the anterior compartment of the leg: the tibialis anterior, a long and thick muscle on the lateral
surface of the tibia, the extensor hallucis longus, deep under it, and the extensor digitorum longus, lateral to it, all
contribute to raising the front of the foot when they contract. The fibularis tertius, a small muscle that originates on
the anterior surface of the fibula, is associated with the extensor digitorum longus and sometimes fused to it, but is
not present in all people. Thick bands of connective tissue called the superior extensor retinaculum (transverse
ligament of the ankle) and the inferior extensor retinaculum, hold the tendons of these muscles in place during
dorsiflexion.

The lateral compartment of the leg includes two muscles: the fibularis longus (peroneus longus) and the fibularis
brevis (peroneus brevis). The superficial muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg all insert onto the
calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon), a strong tendon that inserts into the calcaneal bone of the ankle. The muscles
in this compartment are large and strong and keep humans upright. The most superficial and visible muscle of the
calf is the gastrocnemius. Deep to the gastrocnemius is the wide, flat soleus. The plantaris runs obliquely between
the two; some people may have two of these muscles, whereas no plantaris is observed in about seven percent of
other cadaver dissections. The plantaris tendon is a desirable substitute for the fascia lata in hernia repair, tendon
transplants, and repair of ligaments. There are four deep muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg as well:
the popliteus, flexor digitorum longus, flexor hallucis longus, and tibialis posterior.
The foot also has intrinsic muscles, which originate and insert within it (similar to the intrinsic muscles of the hand).
These muscles primarily provide support for the foot and its arch, and contribute to movements of the toes (Figure
11.34 and Figure 11.35). The principal support for the longitudinal arch of the foot is a deep fascia called plantar
aponeurosis, which runs from the calcaneus bone to the toes (inflammation of this tissue is the cause of “plantar
fasciitis,” which can affect runners. The intrinsic muscles of the foot consist of two groups. The dorsal group
includes only one muscle, the extensor digitorum brevis. The second group is the plantar group, which consists of
four layers, starting with the most superficial.
FIGURE 11.34
Intrinsic Muscles of the Foot
The muscles along the dorsal side of the foot (a) generally extend the toes while the
muscles of the plantar side of the foot (b, c, d) generally flex the toes. The plantar muscles exist in three layers, providing the foot the
strength to counterbalance the weight of the body. In this diagram, these three layers are shown from a plantar view beginning with the
bottom-most layer just under the plantar skin of the foot (b) and ending with the top-most layer (d) located just inferior to the foot and toe
bones.
