20.5 Circulatory Pathways
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the vessels through which blood travels within the pulmonary circuit, beginning from the right ventricle
of the heart and ending at the left atrium
•
Create a flow chart showing the major systemic arteries through which blood travels from the aorta and its
major branches, to the most significant arteries feeding into the right and left upper and lower limbs
•
Create a flow chart showing the major systemic veins through which blood travels from the feet to the right
atrium of the heart
Virtually every cell, tissue, organ, and system in the body is impacted by the circulatory system. This includes the
generalized and more specialized functions of transport of materials, capillary exchange, maintaining health by
transporting white blood cells and various immunoglobulins (antibodies), hemostasis, regulation of body
temperature, and helping to maintain acid-base balance. In addition to these shared functions, many systems enjoy
a unique relationship with the circulatory system. Figure 20.22 summarizes these relationships.

FIGURE 20.22
Interaction of the Circulatory System with Other Body Systems

As you learn about the vessels of the systemic and pulmonary circuits, notice that many arteries and veins share the
same names, parallel one another throughout the body, and are very similar on the right and left sides of the body.
These pairs of vessels will be traced through only one side of the body. Where differences occur in branching
patterns or when vessels are singular, this will be indicated. For example, you will find a pair of femoral arteries and
a pair of femoral veins, with one vessel on each side of the body. In contrast, some vessels closer to the midline of
the body, such as the aorta, are unique. Moreover, some superficial veins, such as the great saphenous vein in the
femoral region, have no arterial counterpart. Another phenomenon that can make the study of vessels challenging is
that names of vessels can change with location. Like a street that changes name as it passes through an
intersection, an artery or vein can change names as it passes an anatomical landmark. For example, the left
subclavian artery becomes the axillary artery as it passes through the body wall and into the axillary region, and
then becomes the brachial artery as it flows from the axillary region into the upper arm (or brachium). You will also
find examples of anastomoses where two blood vessels that previously branched reconnect. Anastomoses are
especially common in veins, where they help maintain blood flow even when one vessel is blocked or narrowed,
although there are some important ones in the arteries supplying the brain.

As you read about circular pathways, notice that there is an occasional, very large artery referred to as a trunk, a
term indicating that the vessel gives rise to several smaller arteries. For example, the celiac trunk gives rise to the
left gastric, common hepatic, and splenic arteries.
As you study this section, imagine you are on a “Voyage of Discovery” similar to Lewis and Clark’s expedition in
1804–1806, which followed rivers and streams through unfamiliar territory, seeking a water route from the Atlantic
to the Pacific Ocean. You might envision being inside a miniature boat, exploring the various branches of the
circulatory system. This simple approach has proven effective for many students in mastering these major
circulatory patterns. Another approach that works well for many students is to create simple line drawings similar to
the ones provided, labeling each of the major vessels. It is beyond the scope of this text to name every vessel in the
body. However, we will attempt to discuss the major pathways for blood and acquaint you with the major named
arteries and veins in the body. Also, please keep in mind that individual variations in circulation patterns are not
uncommon.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/arts1) for a brief summary of the arteries.

Pulmonary Circulation
Recall that blood returning from the systemic circuit enters the right atrium (Figure 20.23) via the superior and
inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus, which drains the blood supply of the heart muscle. These vessels will
be described more fully later in this section. This blood is relatively low in oxygen and relatively high in carbon
dioxide, since much of the oxygen has been extracted for use by the tissues and the waste gas carbon dioxide was
picked up to be transported to the lungs for elimination. From the right atrium, blood moves into the right ventricle,
which pumps it to the lungs for gas exchange. This system of vessels is referred to as the pulmonary circuit.
The single vessel exiting the right ventricle is the pulmonary trunk. At the base of the pulmonary trunk is the
pulmonary semilunar valve, which prevents backflow of blood into the right ventricle during ventricular diastole. As
the pulmonary trunk reaches the superior surface of the heart, it curves posteriorly and rapidly bifurcates (divides)
into two branches, a left and a right pulmonary artery. To prevent confusion between these vessels, it is important
to refer to the vessel exiting the heart as the pulmonary trunk, rather than also calling it a pulmonary artery. The
pulmonary arteries in turn branch many times within the lung, forming a series of smaller arteries and arterioles that
eventually lead to the pulmonary capillaries. The pulmonary capillaries surround lung structures known as alveoli
that are the sites of oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange.
Once gas exchange is completed, oxygenated blood flows from the pulmonary capillaries into a series of pulmonary
venules that eventually lead to a series of larger pulmonary veins. Four pulmonary veins, two on the left and two on
the right, return blood to the left atrium. At this point, the pulmonary circuit is complete. Table 20.4 defines the
major arteries and veins of the pulmonary circuit discussed in the text.

FIGURE 20.23
Pulmonary Circuit

Blood exiting from the right ventricle flows into the pulmonary trunk, which bifurcates into the two
pulmonary arteries. These vessels branch to supply blood to the pulmonary capillaries, where gas exchange occurs within the lung alveoli.
Blood returns via the pulmonary veins to the left atrium.

Pulmonary Arteries and Veins
Vessel
Description
Pulmonary
trunk
Single large vessel exiting the right ventricle that divides to form the right and left pulmonary
arteries
Pulmonary
arteries
Left and right vessels that form from the pulmonary trunk and lead to smaller arterioles and
eventually to the pulmonary capillaries
Pulmonary
veins
Two sets of paired vessels—one pair on each side—that are formed from the small venules, leading
away from the pulmonary capillaries to flow into the left atrium
TABLE 20.4
Overview of Systemic Arteries

Blood relatively high in oxygen concentration is returned from the pulmonary circuit to the left atrium via the four
pulmonary veins. From the left atrium, blood moves into the left ventricle, which pumps blood into the aorta. The
aorta and its branches—the systemic arteries—send blood to virtually every organ of the body (Figure 20.24).

FIGURE 20.24
Systemic Arteries
The major systemic arteries shown here deliver oxygenated blood throughout the body.

The Aorta
The aorta is the largest artery in the body (Figure 20.25). It arises from the left ventricle and eventually descends to
the abdominal region, where it bifurcates at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra into the two common iliac
arteries. The aorta consists of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the descending aorta, which passes through
the diaphragm and a landmark that divides into the superior thoracic and inferior abdominal components. Arteries
originating from the aorta ultimately distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body. At the base of the aorta is
the aortic semilunar valve that prevents backflow of blood into the left ventricle while the heart is relaxing. After
exiting the heart, the ascending aorta moves in a superior direction for approximately 5 cm and ends at the sternal
angle. Following this ascent, it reverses direction, forming a graceful arc to the left, called the aortic arch. The aortic
arch descends toward the inferior portions of the body and ends at the level of the intervertebral disk between the
fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae. Beyond this point, the descending aorta continues close to the bodies of the
vertebrae and passes through an opening in the diaphragm known as the aortic hiatus. Superior to the diaphragm,
the aorta is called the thoracic aorta, and inferior to the diaphragm, it is called the abdominal aorta. The abdominal
aorta terminates when it bifurcates into the two common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. See
Figure 20.25 for an illustration of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the initial segment of the descending
aorta plus major branches; Table 20.5 summarizes the structures of the aorta.

FIGURE 20.25
Aorta
The aorta has distinct regions, including the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and the descending aorta, which
includes the thoracic and abdominal regions.

Components of the Aorta
Vessel
Description
Aorta
Largest artery in the body, originating from the left ventricle and descending to the abdominal
region, where it bifurcates into the common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar
vertebra; arteries originating from the aorta distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body
Ascending
aorta
Initial portion of the aorta, rising superiorly from the left ventricle for a distance of approximately
5 cm
Aortic arch
Graceful arc to the left that connects the ascending aorta to the descending aorta; ends at the
intervertebral disk between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae
Descending
aorta
Portion of the aorta that continues inferiorly past the end of the aortic arch; subdivided into the
thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta
TABLE 20.5

Vessel
Description
Thoracic
aorta
Portion of the descending aorta superior to the aortic hiatus
Abdominal
aorta
Portion of the aorta inferior to the aortic hiatus and superior to the common iliac arteries
TABLE 20.5

Coronary Circulation
The first vessels that branch from the ascending aorta are the paired coronary arteries (see Figure 20.25), which
arise from two of the three sinuses in the ascending aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve. These sinuses
contain the aortic baroreceptors and chemoreceptors critical to maintain cardiac function. The left coronary artery
arises from the left posterior aortic sinus. The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus. Normally,
the right posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a vessel.
The coronary arteries encircle the heart, forming a ring-like structure that divides into the next level of branches that
supplies blood to the heart tissues. (Seek additional content for more detail on cardiac circulation.)

Aortic Arch Branches
There are three major branches of the aortic arch: the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid artery, and
the left subclavian (literally “under the clavicle”) artery. As you would expect based upon proximity to the heart,
each of these vessels is classified as an elastic artery.
The brachiocephalic artery is located only on the right side of the body; there is no corresponding artery on the left.
The brachiocephalic artery branches into the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery. The left
subclavian and left common carotid arteries arise independently from the aortic arch but otherwise follow a similar
pattern and distribution to the corresponding arteries on the right side (see Figure 20.23).
Each subclavian artery supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous system. It then
gives rise to three major branches: the internal thoracic artery, the vertebral artery, and the thyrocervical artery. The
internal thoracic artery, or mammary artery, supplies blood to the thymus, the pericardium of the heart, and the
anterior chest wall. The vertebral artery passes through the vertebral foramen in the cervical vertebrae and then
through the foramen magnum into the cranial cavity to supply blood to the brain and spinal cord. The paired
vertebral arteries join together to form the large basilar artery at the base of the medulla oblongata. This is an
example of an anastomosis. The subclavian artery also gives rise to the thyrocervical artery that provides blood to
the thyroid, the cervical region of the neck, and the upper back and shoulder.
The common carotid artery divides into internal and external carotid arteries. The right common carotid artery
arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery arises directly from the aortic arch. The
external carotid artery supplies blood to numerous structures within the face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and
larynx. These branches include the lingual, facial, occipital, maxillary, and superficial temporal arteries. The internal
carotid artery initially forms an expansion known as the carotid sinus, containing the carotid baroreceptors and
chemoreceptors. Like their counterparts in the aortic sinuses, the information provided by these receptors is critical
to maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis (see Figure 20.23).
The internal carotid arteries along with the vertebral arteries are the two primary suppliers of blood to the human
brain. Given the central role and vital importance of the brain to life, it is critical that blood supply to this organ
remains uninterrupted. Recall that blood flow to the brain is remarkably constant, with approximately 20 percent of
blood flow directed to this organ at any given time. When blood flow is interrupted, even for just a few seconds, a
transient ischemic attack (TIA), or mini-stroke, may occur, resulting in loss of consciousness or temporary loss of
neurological function. In some cases, the damage may be permanent. Loss of blood flow for longer periods, typically
between 3 and 4 minutes, will likely produce irreversible brain damage or a stroke, also called a cerebrovascular
accident (CVA). The locations of the arteries in the brain not only provide blood flow to the brain tissue but also
prevent interruption in the flow of blood. Both the carotid and vertebral arteries branch once they enter the cranial
cavity, and some of these branches form a structure known as the arterial circle (or circle of Willis), an
anastomosis that is remarkably like a traffic circle that sends off branches (in this case, arterial branches to the
brain). As a rule, branches to the anterior portion of the cerebrum are normally fed by the internal carotid arteries;
the remainder of the brain receives blood flow from branches associated with the vertebral arteries.
The internal carotid artery continues through the carotid canal of the temporal bone and enters the base of the brain
through the carotid foramen where it gives rise to several branches (Figure 20.26 and Figure 20.27). One of these
branches is the anterior cerebral artery that supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum. Another branch, the
middle cerebral artery, supplies blood to the temporal and parietal lobes, which are the most common sites of
CVAs. The ophthalmic artery, the third major branch, provides blood to the eyes.
The right and left anterior cerebral arteries join together to form an anastomosis called the anterior communicating
artery. The initial segments of the anterior cerebral arteries and the anterior communicating artery form the anterior
portion of the arterial circle. The posterior portion of the arterial circle is formed by a left and a right posterior
communicating artery that branches from the posterior cerebral artery, which arises from the basilar artery. It
provides blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem. The basilar artery is an anastomosis that
begins at the junction of the two vertebral arteries and sends branches to the cerebellum and brain stem. It flows
into the posterior cerebral arteries. Table 20.6 summarizes the aortic arch branches, including the major branches
supplying the brain.

FIGURE 20.26
Arteries Supplying the Head and Neck
The common carotid artery gives rise to the external and internal carotid
arteries. The external carotid artery remains superficial and gives rise to many arteries of the head. The internal carotid artery first forms
the carotid sinus and then reaches the brain via the carotid canal and carotid foramen, emerging into the cranium via the foramen lacerum.
The vertebral artery branches from the subclavian artery and passes through the transverse foramen in the cervical vertebrae, entering the
base of the skull at the vertebral foramen. The subclavian artery continues toward the arm as the axillary artery.


FIGURE 20.27
Arteries Serving the Brain
This inferior view shows the network of arteries serving the brain. The structure is referred
to as the arterial circle or circle of Willis.

Aortic Arch Branches and Brain Circulation
Vessel
Description
Brachiocephalic
artery
Single vessel located on the right side of the body; the first vessel branching from the aortic
arch; gives rise to the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery; supplies
blood to the head, neck, upper limb, and wall of the thoracic region
Subclavian
artery
The right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery while the left subclavian
artery arises from the aortic arch; gives rise to the internal thoracic, vertebral, and
thyrocervical arteries; supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous
system
Internal
thoracic artery
Also called the mammary artery; arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the
thymus, pericardium of the heart, and anterior chest wall
Vertebral artery
Arises from the subclavian artery and passes through the vertebral foramen through the
foramen magnum to the brain; joins with the internal carotid artery to form the arterial circle;
supplies blood to the brain and spinal cord
Thyrocervical
artery
Arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the thyroid, the cervical region, the upper
back, and shoulder
Common
carotid artery
The right common carotid artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common
carotid artery arises from the aortic arch; each gives rise to the external and internal carotid
arteries; supplies the respective sides of the head and neck
External carotid
artery
Arises from the common carotid artery; supplies blood to numerous structures within the
face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and larynx
TABLE 20.6


Vessel
Description
Internal carotid
artery
Arises from the common carotid artery and begins with the carotid sinus; goes through the
carotid canal of the temporal bone to the base of the brain; combines with the branches of the
vertebral artery, forming the arterial circle; supplies blood to the brain
Arterial circle or
circle of Willis
An anastomosis located at the base of the brain that ensures continual blood supply; formed
from the branches of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries; supplies blood to the brain
Anterior
cerebral artery
Arises from the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum
Middle cerebral
artery
Another branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the temporal and parietal
lobes of the cerebrum
Ophthalmic
artery
Branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the eyes
Anterior
communicating
artery
An anastomosis of the right and left internal carotid arteries; supplies blood to the brain
Posterior
communicating
artery
Branches of the posterior cerebral artery that form part of the posterior portion of the arterial
circle; supplies blood to the brain
Posterior
cerebral artery
Branch of the basilar artery that forms a portion of the posterior segment of the arterial circle
of Willis; supplies blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem
Basilar artery
Formed from the fusion of the two vertebral arteries; sends branches to the cerebellum, brain
stem, and the posterior cerebral arteries; the main blood supply to the brain stem
TABLE 20.6

Thoracic Aorta and Major Branches
The thoracic aorta begins at the level of vertebra T5 and continues through to the diaphragm at the level of T12,
initially traveling within the mediastinum to the left of the vertebral column. As it passes through the thoracic region,
the thoracic aorta gives rise to several branches, which are collectively referred to as visceral branches and parietal
branches (Figure 20.28). Those branches that supply blood primarily to visceral organs are known as the visceral
branches and include the bronchial arteries, pericardial arteries, esophageal arteries, and the mediastinal arteries,
each named after the tissues it supplies. Each bronchial artery (typically two on the left and one on the right)
supplies systemic blood to the lungs and visceral pleura, in addition to the blood pumped to the lungs for
oxygenation via the pulmonary circuit. The bronchial arteries follow the same path as the respiratory branches,
beginning with the bronchi and ending with the bronchioles. There is considerable, but not total, intermingling of the
systemic and pulmonary blood at anastomoses in the smaller branches of the lungs. This may sound
incongruous—that is, the mixing of systemic arterial blood high in oxygen with the pulmonary arterial blood lower in
oxygen—but the systemic vessels also deliver nutrients to the lung tissue just as they do elsewhere in the body. The
mixed blood drains into typical pulmonary veins, whereas the bronchial artery branches remain separate and drain
into bronchial veins described later. Each pericardial artery supplies blood to the pericardium, the esophageal
artery provides blood to the esophagus, and the mediastinal artery provides blood to the mediastinum. The
remaining thoracic aorta branches are collectively referred to as parietal branches or somatic branches, and
include the intercostal and superior phrenic arteries. Each intercostal artery provides blood to the muscles of the
thoracic cavity and vertebral column. The superior phrenic artery provides blood to the superior surface of the
diaphragm. Table 20.7 lists the arteries of the thoracic region.

FIGURE 20.28
Arteries of the Thoracic and Abdominal Regions
The thoracic aorta gives rise to the arteries of the visceral and
parietal branches.

Arteries of the Thoracic Region
Vessel
Description
Visceral
branches
A group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the viscera (i.e., organs) of the
thorax
Bronchial
artery
Systemic branch from the aorta that provides oxygenated blood to the lungs; this blood supply is
in addition to the pulmonary circuit that brings blood for oxygenation
Pericardial
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the pericardium
Esophageal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the esophagus
Mediastinal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the mediastinum
TABLE 20.7

Vessel
Description
Parietal
branches
Also called somatic branches, a group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; include those that
supply blood to the thoracic wall, vertebral column, and the superior surface of the diaphragm
Intercostal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity and vertebral
column
Superior
phrenic
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the superior surface of the diaphragm
TABLE 20.7

Abdominal Aorta and Major Branches
After crossing through the diaphragm at the aortic hiatus, the thoracic aorta is called the abdominal aorta (see
Figure 20.28). This vessel remains to the left of the vertebral column and is embedded in adipose tissue behind the
peritoneal cavity. It formally ends at approximately the level of vertebra L4, where it bifurcates to form the common
iliac arteries. Before this division, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several important branches. A single celiac
trunk (artery) emerges and divides into the left gastric artery to supply blood to the stomach and esophagus, the
splenic artery to supply blood to the spleen, and the common hepatic artery, which in turn gives rise to the
hepatic artery proper to supply blood to the liver, the right gastric artery to supply blood to the stomach, the
cystic artery to supply blood to the gall bladder, and several branches, one to supply blood to the duodenum and
another to supply blood to the pancreas. Two additional single vessels arise from the abdominal aorta. These are
the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries. The superior mesenteric artery arises approximately 2.5 cm after the
celiac trunk and branches into several major vessels that supply blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum,
and ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine. The inferior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the
distal segment of the large intestine, including the rectum. It arises approximately 5 cm superior to the common
iliac arteries.
In addition to these single branches, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several significant paired arteries along the
way. These include the inferior phrenic arteries, the adrenal arteries, the renal arteries, the gonadal arteries, and the
lumbar arteries. Each inferior phrenic artery is a counterpart of a superior phrenic artery and supplies blood to the
inferior surface of the diaphragm. The adrenal artery supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands and arises
near the superior mesenteric artery. Each renal artery branches approximately 2.5 cm inferior to the superior
mesenteric arteries and supplies a kidney. The right renal artery is longer than the left since the aorta lies to the left
of the vertebral column and the vessel must travel a greater distance to reach its target. Renal arteries branch
repeatedly to supply blood to the kidneys. Each gonadal artery supplies blood to the gonads, or reproductive
organs, and is also described as either an ovarian artery or a testicular artery (internal spermatic), depending upon
the sex of the individual. An ovarian artery supplies blood to an ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and the uterus, and
is located within the suspensory ligament of the uterus. It is considerably shorter than a testicular artery, which
ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes, forming one component of the spermatic cord. The gonadal
arteries arise inferior to the renal arteries and are generally retroperitoneal. The ovarian artery continues to the
uterus where it forms an anastomosis with the uterine artery that supplies blood to the uterus. Both the uterine
arteries and vaginal arteries, which distribute blood to the vagina, are branches of the internal iliac artery. The four
paired lumbar arteries are the counterparts of the intercostal arteries and supply blood to the lumbar region, the
abdominal wall, and the spinal cord. In some instances, a fifth pair of lumbar arteries emerges from the median
sacral artery.
The aorta divides at approximately the level of vertebra L4 into a left and a right common iliac artery but continues
as a small vessel, the median sacral artery, into the sacrum. The common iliac arteries provide blood to the pelvic
region and ultimately to the lower limbs. They split into external and internal iliac arteries approximately at the level
of the lumbar-sacral articulation. Each internal iliac artery sends branches to the urinary bladder, the walls of the
pelvis, the external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region. In females, they also provide blood to the
uterus and vagina. The much larger external iliac artery supplies blood to each of the lower limbs. Figure 20.29
shows the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the thoracic and abdominal regions. Figure 20.30
shows the distribution of the major branches of the common iliac arteries. Table 20.8 summarizes the major
branches of the abdominal aorta.

FIGURE 20.29
Major Branches of the Aorta
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the
thoracic and abdominal regions.

FIGURE 20.30
Major Branches of the Iliac Arteries
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major branches of the common
iliac arteries into the pelvis and lower limbs. The left side follows a similar pattern to the right.

Vessels of the Abdominal Aorta
Vessel
Description
Celiac
trunk
Also called the celiac artery; a major branch of the abdominal aorta; gives rise to the left gastric
artery, the splenic artery, and the common hepatic artery that forms the hepatic artery to the liver,
the right gastric artery to the stomach, and the cystic artery to the gall bladder
Left gastric
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the stomach
Splenic
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the spleen
Common
hepatic
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk that forms the hepatic artery, the right gastric artery, and the cystic
artery
Hepatic
artery
proper
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies systemic blood to the liver
Right
gastric
artery
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the stomach
TABLE 20.8

Vessel
Description
Cystic
artery
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the gall bladder
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and
ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the distal segment of the large intestine and
rectum
Inferior
phrenic
arteries
Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the inferior surface of the diaphragm
Adrenal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands
Renal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies each kidney
Gonadal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the gonads or reproductive organs; also
described as ovarian arteries or testicular arteries, depending upon the sex of the individual
Ovarian
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and uterus
Testicular
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes and forms
one component of the spermatic cord
Lumbar
arteries
Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the lumbar region, the abdominal wall, and
spinal cord
Common
iliac artery
Branch of the aorta that leads to the internal and external iliac arteries
Median
sacral
artery
Continuation of the aorta into the sacrum
Internal
iliac artery
Branch from the common iliac arteries; supplies blood to the urinary bladder, walls of the pelvis,
external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region; in females, also provides blood to
the uterus and vagina
External
iliac artery
Branch of the common iliac artery that leaves the body cavity and becomes a femoral artery;
supplies blood to the lower limbs
TABLE 20.8

Arteries Serving the Upper Limbs
As the subclavian artery exits the thorax into the axillary region, it is renamed the axillary artery. Although it does
branch and supply blood to the region near the head of the humerus (via the humeral circumflex arteries), the
majority of the vessel continues into the upper arm, or brachium, and becomes the brachial artery (Figure 20.31).
The brachial artery supplies blood to much of the brachial region and divides at the elbow into several smaller
branches, including the deep brachial arteries, which provide blood to the posterior surface of the arm, and the ulnar
collateral arteries, which supply blood to the region of the elbow. As the brachial artery approaches the coronoid
fossa, it bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries, which continue into the forearm, or antebrachium. The radial
artery and ulnar artery parallel their namesake bones, giving off smaller branches until they reach the wrist, or
carpal region. At this level, they fuse to form the superficial and deep palmar arches that supply blood to the hand,
as well as the digital arteries that supply blood to the digits. Figure 20.32 shows the distribution of systemic
arteries from the heart into the upper limb. Table 20.9 summarizes the arteries serving the upper limbs.

FIGURE 20.31
Major Arteries Serving the Thorax and Upper Limb
The arteries that supply blood to the arms and hands are
extensions of the subclavian arteries.

FIGURE 20.32
Major Arteries of the Upper Limb
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major arteries from the heart into
the upper limb.

Arteries Serving the Upper Limbs
Vessel
Description
Axillary
artery
Continuation of the subclavian artery as it penetrates the body wall and enters the axillary region;
supplies blood to the region near the head of the humerus (humeral circumflex arteries); the
majority of the vessel continues into the brachium and becomes the brachial artery
Brachial
artery
Continuation of the axillary artery in the brachium; supplies blood to much of the brachial region;
gives off several smaller branches that provide blood to the posterior surface of the arm in the
region of the elbow; bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries at the coronoid fossa
Radial
artery
Formed at the bifurcation of the brachial artery; parallels the radius; gives off smaller branches
until it reaches the carpal region where it fuses with the ulnar artery to form the superficial and
deep palmar arches; supplies blood to the lower arm and carpal region
Ulnar
artery
Formed at the bifurcation of the brachial artery; parallels the ulna; gives off smaller branches until
it reaches the carpal region where it fuses with the radial artery to form the superficial and deep
palmar arches; supplies blood to the lower arm and carpal region
TABLE 20.9

Vessel
Description
Palmar
arches
(superficial
and deep)
Formed from anastomosis of the radial and ulnar arteries; supply blood to the hand and digital
arteries
Digital
arteries
Formed from the superficial and deep palmar arches; supply blood to the digits
TABLE 20.9

Arteries Serving the Lower Limbs
The external iliac artery exits the body cavity and enters the femoral region of the lower leg (Figure 20.33). As it
passes through the body wall, it is renamed the femoral artery. It gives off several smaller branches as well as the
lateral deep femoral artery that in turn gives rise to a lateral circumflex artery. These arteries supply blood to the
deep muscles of the thigh as well as ventral and lateral regions of the integument. The femoral artery also gives rise
to the genicular artery, which provides blood to the region of the knee. As the femoral artery passes posterior to the
knee near the popliteal fossa, it is called the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery branches into the anterior and
posterior tibial arteries.
The anterior tibial artery is located between the tibia and fibula, and supplies blood to the muscles and integument
of the anterior tibial region. Upon reaching the tarsal region, it becomes the dorsalis pedis artery, which branches
repeatedly and provides blood to the tarsal and dorsal regions of the foot. The posterior tibial artery provides blood
to the muscles and integument on the posterior surface of the tibial region. The fibular or peroneal artery branches
from the posterior tibial artery. It bifurcates and becomes the medial plantar artery and lateral plantar artery,
providing blood to the plantar surfaces. There is an anastomosis with the dorsalis pedis artery, and the medial and
lateral plantar arteries form two arches called the dorsal arch (also called the arcuate arch) and the plantar arch,
which provide blood to the remainder of the foot and toes. Figure 20.34 shows the distribution of the major systemic
arteries in the lower limb. Table 20.10 summarizes the major systemic arteries discussed in the text.

FIGURE 20.33
Major Arteries Serving the Lower Limb
Major arteries serving the lower limb are shown in anterior and posterior views.

FIGURE 20.34
Systemic Arteries of the Lower Limb
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the systemic arteries from the
external iliac artery into the lower limb.

Arteries Serving the Lower Limbs
Vessel
Description
Femoral
artery
Continuation of the external iliac artery after it passes through the body cavity; divides into several
smaller branches, the lateral deep femoral artery, and the genicular artery; becomes the popliteal
artery as it passes posterior to the knee
Deep
femoral
artery
Branch of the femoral artery; gives rise to the lateral circumflex arteries
Lateral
circumflex
artery
Branch of the deep femoral artery; supplies blood to the deep muscles of the thigh and the ventral
and lateral regions of the integument
TABLE 20.10
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
861
Vessel
Description
Genicular
artery
Branch of the femoral artery; supplies blood to the region of the knee
Popliteal
artery
Continuation of the femoral artery posterior to the knee; branches into the anterior and posterior
tibial arteries
Anterior
tibial
artery
Branches from the popliteal artery; supplies blood to the anterior tibial region; becomes the
dorsalis pedis artery
Dorsalis
pedis
artery
Forms from the anterior tibial artery; branches repeatedly to supply blood to the tarsal and dorsal
regions of the foot
Posterior
tibial
artery
Branches from the popliteal artery and gives rise to the fibular or peroneal artery; supplies blood to
the posterior tibial region
Medial
plantar
artery
Arises from the bifurcation of the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the medial plantar
surfaces of the foot
Lateral
plantar
artery
Arises from the bifurcation of the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the lateral plantar
surfaces of the foot
Dorsal or
arcuate
arch
Formed from the anastomosis of the dorsalis pedis artery and the medial and plantar arteries;
branches supply the distal portions of the foot and digits
Plantar
arch
Formed from the anastomosis of the dorsalis pedis artery and the medial and plantar arteries;
branches supply the distal portions of the foot and digits
TABLE 20.10
Overview of Systemic Veins
Systemic veins return blood to the right atrium. Since the blood has already passed through the systemic capillaries,
it will be relatively low in oxygen concentration. In many cases, there will be veins draining organs and regions of the
body with the same name as the arteries that supplied these regions and the two often parallel one another. This is
often described as a “complementary” pattern. However, there is a great deal more variability in the venous
circulation than normally occurs in the arteries. For the sake of brevity and clarity, this text will discuss only the most
commonly encountered patterns. However, keep this variation in mind when you move from the classroom to
clinical practice.
In both the neck and limb regions, there are often both superficial and deeper levels of veins. The deeper veins
generally correspond to the complementary arteries. The superficial veins do not normally have direct arterial
counterparts, but in addition to returning blood, they also make contributions to the maintenance of body
temperature. When the ambient temperature is warm, more blood is diverted to the superficial veins where heat can
be more easily dissipated to the environment. In colder weather, there is more constriction of the superficial veins
and blood is diverted deeper where the body can retain more of the heat.
The “Voyage of Discovery” analogy and stick drawings mentioned earlier remain valid techniques for the study of
systemic veins, but veins present a more difficult challenge because there are numerous anastomoses and multiple
branches. It is like following a river with many tributaries and channels, several of which interconnect. Tracing blood
flow through arteries follows the current in the direction of blood flow, so that we move from the heart through the
large arteries and into the smaller arteries to the capillaries. From the capillaries, we move into the smallest veins
and follow the direction of blood flow into larger veins and back to the heart. Figure 20.35 outlines the path of the
major systemic veins.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/veinsum) for a brief online summary of the veins.

FIGURE 20.35
Major Systemic Veins of the Body
The major systemic veins of the body are shown here in an anterior view.

The right atrium receives all of the systemic venous return. Most of the blood flows into either the superior vena
cava or inferior vena cava. If you draw an imaginary line at the level of the diaphragm, systemic venous circulation
from above that line will generally flow into the superior vena cava; this includes blood from the head, neck, chest,
shoulders, and upper limbs. The exception to this is that most venous blood flow from the coronary veins flows
directly into the coronary sinus and from there directly into the right atrium. Beneath the diaphragm, systemic
venous flow enters the inferior vena cava, that is, blood from the abdominal and pelvic regions and the lower limbs.

The Superior Vena Cava
The superior vena cava drains most of the body superior to the diaphragm (Figure 20.36). On both the left and right
sides, the subclavian vein forms when the axillary vein passes through the body wall from the axillary region. It
fuses with the external and internal jugular veins from the head and neck to form the brachiocephalic vein. Each
vertebral vein also flows into the brachiocephalic vein close to this fusion. These veins arise from the base of the
brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord, and flow largely through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical
vertebrae. They are the counterparts of the vertebral arteries. Each internal thoracic vein, also known as an internal
mammary vein, drains the anterior surface of the chest wall and flows into the brachiocephalic vein.
The remainder of the blood supply from the thorax drains into the azygos vein. Each intercostal vein drains muscles
of the thoracic wall, each esophageal vein delivers blood from the inferior portions of the esophagus, each
bronchial vein drains the systemic circulation from the lungs, and several smaller veins drain the mediastinal
region. Bronchial veins carry approximately 13 percent of the blood that flows into the bronchial arteries; the
remainder intermingles with the pulmonary circulation and returns to the heart via the pulmonary veins. These veins
flow into the azygos vein, and with the smaller hemiazygos vein (hemi- = “half”) on the left of the vertebral column,
drain blood from the thoracic region. The hemiazygos vein does not drain directly into the superior vena cava but
enters the brachiocephalic vein via the superior intercostal vein.
The azygos vein passes through the diaphragm from the thoracic cavity on the right side of the vertebral column and
begins in the lumbar region of the thoracic cavity. It flows into the superior vena cava at approximately the level of
T2, making a significant contribution to the flow of blood. It combines with the two large left and right
brachiocephalic veins to form the superior vena cava.

Table 20.11 summarizes the veins of the thoracic region that flow into the superior vena cava.
FIGURE 20.36
Veins of the Thoracic and Abdominal Regions
Veins of the thoracic and abdominal regions drain blood from the area
above the diaphragm, returning it to the right atrium via the superior vena cava.

Veins of the Thoracic Region
Vessel
Description
Superior vena
cava
Large systemic vein; drains blood from most areas superior to the diaphragm; empties into
the right atrium
Subclavian vein
Located deep in the thoracic cavity; formed by the axillary vein as it enters the thoracic cavity
from the axillary region; drains the axillary and smaller local veins near the scapular region
and leads to the brachiocephalic vein
Brachiocephalic
veins
Pair of veins that form from a fusion of the external and internal jugular veins and the
subclavian vein; subclavian, external and internal jugulars, vertebral, and internal thoracic
veins flow into it; drain the upper thoracic region and lead to the superior vena cava
Vertebral vein
Arises from the base of the brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord; passes through
the intervertebral foramina in the cervical vertebrae; drains smaller veins from the cranium,
spinal cord, and vertebrae, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein; counterpart of the vertebral
artery
Internal
thoracic veins
Also called internal mammary veins; drain the anterior surface of the chest wall and lead to
the brachiocephalic vein
Intercostal vein
Drains the muscles of the thoracic wall and leads to the azygos vein
Esophageal
vein
Drains the inferior portions of the esophagus and leads to the azygos vein
Bronchial vein
Drains the systemic circulation from the lungs and leads to the azygos vein
Azygos vein
Originates in the lumbar region and passes through the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity on
the right side of the vertebral column; drains blood from the intercostal veins, esophageal
veins, bronchial veins, and other veins draining the mediastinal region, and leads to the
superior vena cava
Hemiazygos
vein
Smaller vein complementary to the azygos vein; drains the esophageal veins from the
esophagus and the left intercostal veins, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein via the
superior intercostal vein
TABLE 20.11

Veins of the Head and Neck
Blood from the brain and the superficial facial vein flow into each internal jugular vein (Figure 20.37). Blood from
the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, including the temporal vein and maxillary
vein, flow into each external jugular vein. Although the external and internal jugular veins are separate vessels,
there are anastomoses between them close to the thoracic region. Blood from the external jugular vein empties into
the subclavian vein. Table 20.12 summarizes the major veins of the head and neck.

Major Veins of the Head and Neck
Vessel
Description
Internal
jugular
vein
Parallel to the common carotid artery, which is more or less its counterpart, and passes through the
jugular foramen and canal; primarily drains blood from the brain, receives the superficial facial vein,
and empties into the subclavian vein
Temporal
vein
Drains blood from the temporal region and flows into the external jugular vein
Maxillary
vein
Drains blood from the maxillary region and flows into the external jugular vein
External
jugular
vein
Drains blood from the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, and leads to
the subclavian vein
TABLE 20.12

Venous Drainage of the Brain
Circulation to the brain is both critical and complex (see Figure 20.37). Many smaller veins of the brain stem and the
superficial veins of the cerebrum lead to larger vessels referred to as intracranial sinuses. These include the superior
and inferior sagittal sinuses, straight sinus, cavernous sinuses, left and right sinuses, the petrosal sinuses, and the
occipital sinuses. Ultimately, sinuses will lead back to either the inferior jugular vein or vertebral vein.
Most of the veins on the superior surface of the cerebrum flow into the largest of the sinuses, the superior sagittal
sinus. It is located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater within the falx
cerebri and, at first glance in images or models, can be mistaken for the subarachnoid space. Most reabsorption of
cerebrospinal fluid occurs via the chorionic villi (arachnoid granulations) into the superior sagittal sinus. Blood from
most of the smaller vessels originating from the inferior cerebral veins flows into the great cerebral vein and into
the straight sinus. Other cerebral veins and those from the eye socket flow into the cavernous sinus, which flows
into the petrosal sinus and then into the internal jugular vein. The occipital sinus, sagittal sinus, and straight
sinuses all flow into the left and right transverse sinuses near the lambdoid suture. The transverse sinuses in turn
flow into the sigmoid sinuses that pass through the jugular foramen and into the internal jugular vein. The internal
jugular vein flows parallel to the common carotid artery and is more or less its counterpart. It empties into the
brachiocephalic vein. The veins draining the cervical vertebrae and the posterior surface of the skull, including some
blood from the occipital sinus, flow into the vertebral veins. These parallel the vertebral arteries and travel through
the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. The vertebral veins also flow into the brachiocephalic veins. Table
20.13 summarizes the major veins of the brain.

FIGURE 20.37
Veins of the Head and Neck
This left lateral view shows the veins of the head and neck, including the intercranial
sinuses.

Major Veins of the Brain
Vessel
Description
Superior
sagittal
sinus
Enlarged vein located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater
within the falx cerebri; receives most of the blood drained from the superior surface of the
cerebrum and leads to the inferior jugular vein and the vertebral vein
Great
cerebral
vein
Receives most of the smaller vessels from the inferior cerebral veins and leads to the straight sinus
Straight
sinus
Enlarged vein that drains blood from the brain; receives most of the blood from the great cerebral
vein and leads to the left or right transverse sinus
Cavernous
sinus
Enlarged vein that receives blood from most of the other cerebral veins and the eye socket, and
leads to the petrosal sinus
Petrosal
sinus
Enlarged vein that receives blood from the cavernous sinus and leads into the internal jugular veins
TABLE 20.13

Vessel
Description
Occipital
sinus
Enlarged vein that drains the occipital region near the falx cerebelli and leads to the left and right
transverse sinuses, and also the vertebral veins
Transverse
sinuses
Pair of enlarged veins near the lambdoid suture that drains the occipital, sagittal, and straight
sinuses, and leads to the sigmoid sinuses
Sigmoid
sinuses
Enlarged vein that receives blood from the transverse sinuses and leads through the jugular
foramen to the internal jugular vein
TABLE 20.13

Veins Draining the Upper Limbs
The digital veins in the fingers come together in the hand to form the palmar venous arches (Figure 20.38). From
here, the veins come together to form the radial vein, the ulnar vein, and the median antebrachial vein. The radial
vein and the ulnar vein parallel the bones of the forearm and join together at the antebrachium to form the brachial
vein, a deep vein that flows into the axillary vein in the brachium.
The median antebrachial vein parallels the ulnar vein, is more medial in location, and joins the basilic vein in the
forearm. As the basilic vein reaches the antecubital region, it gives off a branch called the median cubital vein that
crosses at an angle to join the cephalic vein. The median cubital vein is the most common site for drawing venous
blood in humans. The basilic vein continues through the arm medially and superficially to the axillary vein.
The cephalic vein begins in the antebrachium and drains blood from the superficial surface of the arm into the
axillary vein. It is extremely superficial and easily seen along the surface of the biceps brachii muscle in individuals
with good muscle tone and in those without excessive subcutaneous adipose tissue in the arms.
The subscapular vein drains blood from the subscapular region and joins the cephalic vein to form the axillary
vein. As it passes through the body wall and enters the thorax, the axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein.
Many of the larger veins of the thoracic and abdominal region and upper limb are further represented in the flow
chart in Figure 20.39. Table 20.14 summarizes the veins of the upper limbs.

FIGURE 20.38
Veins of the Upper Limb
This anterior view shows the veins that drain the upper limb.

FIGURE 20.39
Veins Flowing into the Superior Vena Cava
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the veins flowing into the
superior vena cava.

Veins of the Upper Limbs
Vessel
Description
Digital veins
Drain the digits and lead to the palmar arches of the hand and dorsal venous arch of the foot
Palmar
venous
arches
Drain the hand and digits, and lead to the radial vein, ulnar veins, and the median antebrachial
vein
Radial vein
Vein that parallels the radius and radial artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to
the brachial vein
Ulnar vein
Vein that parallels the ulna and ulnar artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to
the brachial vein
TABLE 20.14
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
871
Vessel
Description
Brachial
vein
Deeper vein of the arm that forms from the radial and ulnar veins in the lower arm; leads to the
axillary vein
Median
antebrachial
vein
Vein that parallels the ulnar vein but is more medial in location; intertwines with the palmar
venous arches; leads to the basilic vein
Basilic vein
Superficial vein of the arm that arises from the median antebrachial vein, intersects with the
median cubital vein, parallels the ulnar vein, and continues into the upper arm; along with the
brachial vein, it leads to the axillary vein
Median
cubital vein
Superficial vessel located in the antecubital region that links the cephalic vein to the basilic vein
in the form of a v; a frequent site from which to draw blood
Cephalic
vein
Superficial vessel in the upper arm; leads to the axillary vein
Subscapular
vein
Drains blood from the subscapular region and leads to the axillary vein
Axillary vein
The major vein in the axillary region; drains the upper limb and becomes the subclavian vein
TABLE 20.14

The Inferior Vena Cava
Other than the small amount of blood drained by the azygos and hemiazygos veins, most of the blood inferior to the
diaphragm drains into the inferior vena cava before it is returned to the heart (see Figure 20.36). Lying just beneath
the parietal peritoneum in the abdominal cavity, the inferior vena cava parallels the abdominal aorta, where it can
receive blood from abdominal veins. The lumbar portions of the abdominal wall and spinal cord are drained by a
series of lumbar veins, usually four on each side. The ascending lumbar veins drain into either the azygos vein on
the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left, and return to the superior vena cava. The remaining lumbar veins drain
directly into the inferior vena cava.
Blood supply from the kidneys flows into each renal vein, normally the largest veins entering the inferior vena cava.
A number of other, smaller veins empty into the left renal vein. Each adrenal vein drains the adrenal or suprarenal
glands located immediately superior to the kidneys. The right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly,
whereas the left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein.
From the male reproductive organs, each testicular vein flows from the scrotum, forming a portion of the spermatic
cord. Each ovarian vein drains an ovary in females. Each of these veins is generically called a gonadal vein. The
right gonadal vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava, and the left gonadal vein empties into the left renal
vein.
Each side of the diaphragm drains into a phrenic vein; the right phrenic vein empties directly into the inferior vena
cava, whereas the left phrenic vein empties into the left renal vein. Blood supply from the liver drains into each
hepatic vein and directly into the inferior vena cava. Since the inferior vena cava lies primarily to the right of the
vertebral column and aorta, the left renal vein is longer, as are the left phrenic, adrenal, and gonadal veins. The
longer length of the left renal vein makes the left kidney the primary target of surgeons removing this organ for
donation. Figure 20.40 provides a flow chart of the veins flowing into the inferior vena cava. Table 20.15 summarizes
the major veins of the abdominal region.

FIGURE 20.40
Venous Flow into Inferior Vena Cava
The flow chart summarizes veins that deliver blood to the inferior vena cava.

Major Veins of the Abdominal Region
Vessel
Description
Inferior
vena
cava
Large systemic vein that drains blood from areas largely inferior to the diaphragm; empties into the
right atrium
Lumbar
veins
Series of veins that drain the lumbar portion of the abdominal wall and spinal cord; the ascending
lumbar veins drain into the azygos vein on the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left; the remaining
lumbar veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava
Renal
vein
Largest vein entering the inferior vena cava; drains the kidneys and flows into the inferior vena cava
TABLE 20.15

Vessel
Description
Adrenal
vein
Drains the adrenal or suprarenal; the right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly and the
left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein
Testicular
vein
Drains the testes and forms part of the spermatic cord; the right testicular vein empties directly into
the inferior vena cava and the left testicular vein empties into the left renal vein
Ovarian
vein
Drains the ovary; the right ovarian vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava and the left
ovarian vein empties into the left renal vein
Gonadal
vein
Generic term for a vein draining a reproductive organ; may be either an ovarian vein or a testicular
vein, depending on the sex of the individual
Phrenic
vein
Drains the diaphragm; the right phrenic vein flows into the inferior vena cava and the left phrenic
vein empties into the left renal vein
Hepatic
vein
Drains systemic blood from the liver and flows into the inferior vena cava
TABLE 20.15

Veins Draining the Lower Limbs
The superior surface of the foot drains into the digital veins, and the inferior surface drains into the plantar veins,
which flow into a complex series of anastomoses in the feet and ankles, including the dorsal venous arch and the
plantar venous arch (Figure 20.41). From the dorsal venous arch, blood supply drains into the anterior and
posterior tibial veins. The anterior tibial vein drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and combines with the
posterior tibial vein and the fibular vein to form the popliteal vein. The posterior tibial vein drains the posterior
surface of the tibia and joins the popliteal vein. The fibular vein drains the muscles and integument in proximity to
the fibula and also joins the popliteal vein. The small saphenous vein located on the lateral surface of the leg drains
blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg and foot, and flows into to the popliteal vein. As the popliteal
vein passes behind the knee in the popliteal region, it becomes the femoral vein. It is palpable in patients without
excessive adipose tissue.
Close to the body wall, the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the femoral circumflex vein drain into
the femoral vein. The great saphenous vein is a prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg
and thigh that collects blood from the superficial portions of these areas. The deep femoral vein, as the name
suggests, drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh. The femoral circumflex vein forms a loop around the
femur just inferior to the trochanters and drains blood from the areas in proximity to the head and neck of the femur.
As the femoral vein penetrates the body wall from the femoral portion of the upper limb, it becomes the external
iliac vein, a large vein that drains blood from the leg to the common iliac vein. The pelvic organs and integument
drain into the internal iliac vein, which forms from several smaller veins in the region, including the umbilical veins
that run on either side of the bladder. The external and internal iliac veins combine near the inferior portion of the
sacroiliac joint to form the common iliac vein. In addition to blood supply from the external and internal iliac veins,
the middle sacral vein drains the sacral region into the common iliac vein. Similar to the common iliac arteries, the
common iliac veins come together at the level of L5 to form the inferior vena cava.
Figure 20.42 is a flow chart of veins flowing into the lower limb. Table 20.16 summarizes the major veins of the
lower limbs.

FIGURE 20.41
Major Veins Serving the Lower Limbs
Anterior and posterior views show the major veins that drain the lower limb into
the inferior vena cava.

FIGURE 20.42
Major Veins of the Lower Limb
The flow chart summarizes venous flow from the lower limb.

Veins of the Lower Limbs
Vessel
Description
Plantar
veins
Drain the foot and flow into the plantar venous arch
Dorsal
venous
arch
Drains blood from digital veins and vessels on the superior surface of the foot
Plantar
venous
arch
Formed from the plantar veins; flows into the anterior and posterior tibial veins through
anastomoses
Anterior
tibial vein
Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and flows
into the popliteal vein
TABLE 20.16

Vessel
Description
Posterior
tibial vein
Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the posterior surface of the tibia and
flows into the popliteal vein
Fibular
vein
Drains the muscles and integument near the fibula and flows into the popliteal vein
Small
saphenous
vein
Located on the lateral surface of the leg; drains blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg
and foot, and flows into the popliteal vein
Popliteal
vein
Drains the region behind the knee and forms from the fusion of the fibular, anterior, and posterior
tibial veins; flows into the femoral vein
Great
saphenous
vein
Prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh; drains the superficial
portions of these areas and flows into the femoral vein
Deep
femoral
vein
Drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh and flows into the femoral vein
Femoral
circumflex
vein
Forms a loop around the femur just inferior to the trochanters; drains blood from the areas around
the head and neck of the femur; flows into the femoral vein
Femoral
vein
Drains the upper leg; receives blood from the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the
femoral circumflex vein; becomes the external iliac vein when it crosses the body wall
External
iliac vein
Formed when the femoral vein passes into the body cavity; drains the legs and flows into the
common iliac vein
Internal
iliac vein
Drains the pelvic organs and integument; formed from several smaller veins in the region; flows
into the common iliac vein
Middle
sacral vein
Drains the sacral region and flows into the left common iliac vein
Common
iliac vein
Flows into the inferior vena cava at the level of L5; the left common iliac vein drains the sacral
region; formed from the union of the external and internal iliac veins near the inferior portion of the
sacroiliac joint
TABLE 20.16

Hepatic Portal System
The liver is a complex biochemical processing plant. It packages nutrients absorbed by the digestive system;
produces plasma proteins, clotting factors, and bile; and disposes of worn-out cell components and waste products.
Instead of entering the circulation directly, absorbed nutrients and certain wastes (for example, materials produced
by the spleen) travel to the liver for processing. They do so via the hepatic portal system (Figure 20.43). Portal
systems begin and end in capillaries. In this case, the initial capillaries from the stomach, small intestine, large
intestine, and spleen lead to the hepatic portal vein and end in specialized capillaries within the liver, the hepatic
sinusoids. You saw the only other portal system with the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal vessel in the endocrine
chapter.
The hepatic portal system consists of the hepatic portal vein and the veins that drain into it. The hepatic portal vein
itself is relatively short, beginning at the level of L2 with the confluence of the superior mesenteric and splenic veins.
It also receives branches from the inferior mesenteric vein, plus the splenic veins and all their tributaries. The
superior mesenteric vein receives blood from the small intestine, two-thirds of the large intestine, and the stomach.
The inferior mesenteric vein drains the distal third of the large intestine, including the descending colon, the sigmoid
colon, and the rectum. The splenic vein is formed from branches from the spleen, pancreas, and portions of the
stomach, and the inferior mesenteric vein. After its formation, the hepatic portal vein also receives branches from
the gastric veins of the stomach and cystic veins from the gall bladder. The hepatic portal vein delivers materials
from these digestive and circulatory organs directly to the liver for processing.
Because of the hepatic portal system, the liver receives its blood supply from two different sources: from normal
systemic circulation via the hepatic artery and from the hepatic portal vein. The liver processes the blood from the
portal system to remove certain wastes and excess nutrients, which are stored for later use. This processed blood,
as well as the systemic blood that came from the hepatic artery, exits the liver via the right, left, and middle hepatic
veins, and flows into the inferior vena cava. Overall systemic blood composition remains relatively stable, since the
liver is able to metabolize the absorbed digestive components.

FIGURE 20.43
Hepatic Portal System
The liver receives blood from the normal systemic circulation via the hepatic artery. It also
receives and processes blood from other organs, delivered via the veins of the hepatic portal system. All blood exits the liver via the hepatic
vein, which delivers the blood to the inferior vena cava. (Different colors are used to help distinguish among the different vessels in the
system.)