15.3 Central Control
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the role of higher centers of the brain in autonomic regulation
•
Explain the connection of the hypothalamus to homeostasis
•
Describe the regions of the CNS that link the autonomic system with emotion
•
Describe the pathways important to descending control of the autonomic system
The pupillary light reflex (Figure 15.10) begins when light hits the retina and causes a signal to travel along the optic
nerve. This is visual sensation, because the afferent branch of this reflex is simply sharing the special sense
pathway. Bright light hitting the retina leads to the parasympathetic response, through the oculomotor nerve,
followed by the postganglionic fiber from the ciliary ganglion, which stimulates the circular fibers of the iris to
contract and constrict the pupil. When light hits the retina in one eye, both pupils contract. When that light is
removed, both pupils dilate again back to the resting position. When the stimulus is unilateral (presented to only one
eye), the response is bilateral (both eyes). The same is not true for somatic reflexes. If you touch a hot radiator, you
only pull that arm back, not both. Central control of autonomic reflexes is different than for somatic reflexes. The
hypothalamus, along with other CNS locations, controls the autonomic system.
FIGURE 15.10

Pupillary Reflex Pathways
The pupil is under competing autonomic control in response to light levels hitting the retina.
The sympathetic system will dilate the pupil when the retina is not receiving enough light, and the parasympathetic system will constrict
the pupil when too much light hits the retina.
Forebrain Structures
Autonomic control is based on the visceral reflexes, composed of the afferent and efferent branches. These
homeostatic mechanisms are based on the balance between the two divisions of the autonomic system, which
results in tone for various organs that is based on the predominant input from the sympathetic or parasympathetic
systems. Coordinating that balance requires integration that begins with forebrain structures like the hypothalamus
and continues into the brain stem and spinal cord.

The Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is the control center for many homeostatic mechanisms. It regulates both autonomic function
and endocrine function. The roles it plays in the pupillary reflexes demonstrates the importance of this control
center. The optic nerve projects primarily to the thalamus, which is the necessary relay to the occipital cortex for
conscious visual perception. Another projection of the optic nerve, however, goes to the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus then uses this visual system input to drive the pupillary reflexes. If the retina is activated by high
levels of light, the hypothalamus stimulates the parasympathetic response. If the optic nerve message shows that
low levels of light are falling on the retina, the hypothalamus activates the sympathetic response. Output from the
hypothalamus follows two main tracts, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus and the medial forebrain bundle (Figure
15.11). Along these two tracts, the hypothalamus can influence the Edinger–Westphal nucleus of the oculomotor
complex or the lateral horns of the thoracic spinal cord.
FIGURE 15.11
Fiber Tracts of the Central Autonomic System
The hypothalamus is the source of most of the central control of
autonomic function. It receives input from cerebral structures and projects to brain stem and spinal cord structures to regulate the balance
of sympathetic and parasympathetic input to the organ systems of the body. The main pathways for this are the medial forebrain bundle
and the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus.
These two tracts connect the hypothalamus with the major parasympathetic nuclei in the brain stem and the
preganglionic (central) neurons of the thoracolumbar spinal cord. The hypothalamus also receives input from other
areas of the forebrain through the medial forebrain bundle. The olfactory cortex, the septal nuclei of the basal
forebrain, and the amygdala project into the hypothalamus through the medial forebrain bundle. These forebrain
structures inform the hypothalamus about the state of the nervous system and can influence the regulatory
processes of homeostasis. A good example of this is found in the amygdala, which is found beneath the cerebral
cortex of the temporal lobe and plays a role in our ability to remember and feel emotions.

The Amygdala
The amygdala is a group of nuclei in the medial region of the temporal lobe that is part of the limbic lobe (Figure
15.12). The limbic lobe includes structures that are involved in emotional responses, as well as structures that
contribute to memory function. The limbic lobe has strong connections with the hypothalamus and influences the
state of its activity on the basis of emotional state. For example, when you are anxious or scared, the amygdala will
send signals to the hypothalamus along the medial forebrain bundle that will stimulate the sympathetic fight-or-
flight response. The hypothalamus will also stimulate the release of stress hormones through its control of the
endocrine system in response to amygdala input.
FIGURE 15.12
The Limbic Lobe
Structures arranged around the edge of the cerebrum constitute the limbic lobe, which includes the
amygdala, hippocampus, and cingulate gyrus, and connects to the hypothalamus.

The Medulla
The medulla contains nuclei referred to as the cardiovascular center, which controls the smooth and cardiac
muscle of the cardiovascular system through autonomic connections. When the homeostasis of the cardiovascular
system shifts, such as when blood pressure changes, the coordination of the autonomic system can be
accomplished within this region. Furthermore, when descending inputs from the hypothalamus stimulate this area,
the sympathetic system can increase activity in the cardiovascular system, such as in response to anxiety or stress.
The preganglionic sympathetic fibers that are responsible for increasing heart rate are referred to as the cardiac
accelerator nerves, whereas the preganglionic sympathetic fibers responsible for constricting blood vessels
compose the vasomotor nerves.
Several brain stem nuclei are important for the visceral control of major organ systems. One brain stem nucleus
involved in cardiovascular function is the solitary nucleus. It receives sensory input about blood pressure and
cardiac function from the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, and its output will activate sympathetic stimulation of
the heart or blood vessels through the upper thoracic lateral horn. Another brain stem nucleus important for visceral
control is the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, which is the motor nucleus for the parasympathetic functions
ascribed to the vagus nerve, including decreasing the heart rate, relaxing bronchial tubes in the lungs, and activating
digestive function through the enteric nervous system. The nucleus ambiguus, which is named for its ambiguous
histology, also contributes to the parasympathetic output of the vagus nerve and targets muscles in the pharynx and
larynx for swallowing and speech, as well as contributing to the parasympathetic tone of the heart along with the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.

Everyday Connection
Exercise and the Autonomic System
In addition to its association with the fight-or-flight response and rest-and-digest functions, the autonomic
system is responsible for certain everyday functions. For example, it comes into play when homeostatic
mechanisms dynamically change, such as the physiological changes that accompany exercise. Getting on the
treadmill and putting in a good workout will cause the heart rate to increase, breathing to be stronger and
deeper, sweat glands to activate, and the digestive system to suspend activity. These are the same physiological
changes associated with the fight-or-flight response, but there is nothing chasing you on that treadmill.
This is not a simple homeostatic mechanism at work because “maintaining the internal environment” would
mean getting all those changes back to their set points. Instead, the sympathetic system has become active
during exercise so that your body can cope with what is happening. A homeostatic mechanism is dealing with
the conscious decision to push the body away from a resting state. The heart, actually, is moving away from its
homeostatic set point. Without any input from the autonomic system, the heart would beat at approximately
100 bpm, and the parasympathetic system slows that down to the resting rate of approximately 70 bpm. But in
the middle of a good workout, you should see your heart rate at 120–140 bpm. You could say that the body is
stressed because of what you are doing to it. Homeostatic mechanisms are trying to keep blood pH in the
normal range, or to keep body temperature under control, but those are in response to the choice to exercise.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/emotions) to learn about physical responses to emotion. The autonomic
system, which is important for regulating the homeostasis of the organ systems, is also responsible for our
physiological responses to emotions such as fear. The video summarizes the extent of the body’s reactions and
describes several effects of the autonomic system in response to fear. On the basis of what you have already studied
about autonomic function, which effect would you expect to be associated with parasympathetic, rather than
sympathetic, activity?

