INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 9
Joints
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Discuss both functional and structural classifications for body joints
•
Describe the characteristic features for fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints and give examples of each
•
Define and identify the different body movements
•
Discuss the structure of specific body joints and the movements allowed by each
•
Explain the development of body joints
The adult human body has 206 bones, and with the exception of the hyoid bone in the neck, each
bone is connected to at least one other bone. Joints are the location where bones come together. Many joints allow
for movement between the bones. At these joints, the articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones can move
smoothly against each other. However, the bones of other joints may be joined to each other by connective tissue or
cartilage. These joints are designed for stability and provide for little or no movement. Importantly, joint stability and
movement are related to each other. This means that stable joints allow for little or no mobility between the
adjacent bones. Conversely, joints that provide the most movement between bones are the least stable.
Understanding the relationship between joint structure and function will help to explain why particular types of
joints are found in certain areas of the body.
The articulating surfaces of bones at stable types of joints, with little or no mobility, are strongly united to each
other. For example, most of the joints of the skull are held together by fibrous connective tissue and do not allow for
movement between the adjacent bones. This lack of mobility is important, because the skull bones serve to protect
the brain. Similarly, other joints united by fibrous connective tissue allow for very little movement, which provides
stability and weight-bearing support for the body. For example, the tibia and fibula of the leg are tightly united to
give stability to the body when standing. At other joints, the bones are held together by cartilage, which permits
limited movements between the bones. Thus, the joints of the vertebral column only allow for small movements
between adjacent vertebrae, but when added together, these movements provide the flexibility that allows your
body to twist, or bend to the front, back, or side. In contrast, at joints that allow for wide ranges of motion, the
articulating surfaces of the bones are not directly united to each other. Instead, these surfaces are enclosed within a
Figure 9.1
Kayaking Without joints, body movements would be impossible. (credit: Graham Richardson/flickr.com)
