6.3 Bone Structure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the anatomical features of a bone
•
Define and list examples of bone markings
•
Describe the histology of bone tissue
•
Compare and contrast compact and spongy bone
•
Identify the structures that compose compact and spongy bone
•
Describe how bones are nourished and innervated

Bone tissue (osseous tissue) differs greatly from other tissues in the body. Bone is hard and many of its functions
depend on that characteristic hardness. Later discussions in this chapter will show that bone is also dynamic in that
its shape adjusts to accommodate stresses. This section will examine the gross anatomy of bone first and then
move on to its histology.
Gross Anatomy of Bone
The structure of a long bone allows for the best visualization of all of the parts of a bone (Figure 6.7). A long bone
has two parts: the diaphysis and the epiphysis. The diaphysis is the tubular shaft that runs between the proximal
and distal ends of the bone. The hollow region in the diaphysis is called the medullary cavity, which is filled with
yellow marrow. The walls of the diaphysis are composed of dense and hard compact bone.
FIGURE 6.7
Anatomy of a Long Bone
A typical long bone shows the gross anatomical characteristics of bone.
The wider section at each end of the bone is called the epiphysis (plural = epiphyses), which is filled with spongy
bone. Red marrow fills the spaces in the spongy bone. Each epiphysis meets the diaphysis at the metaphysis, the
narrow area that contains the epiphyseal plate (growth plate), a layer of hyaline (transparent) cartilage in a growing
bone. When the bone stops growing in early adulthood (approximately 18–21 years), the cartilage is replaced by
osseous tissue and the epiphyseal plate becomes an epiphyseal line.
The medullary cavity has a delicate membranous lining called the endosteum (end- = “inside”; oste- = “bone”),
where bone growth, repair, and remodeling occur. The outer surface of the bone is covered with a fibrous membrane
called the periosteum (peri- = “around” or “surrounding”). The periosteum contains blood vessels, nerves, and
lymphatic vessels that nourish compact bone. Tendons and ligaments also attach to bones at the periosteum. The
periosteum covers the entire outer surface except where the epiphyses meet other bones to form joints (Figure 6.8).
In this region, the epiphyses are covered with articular cartilage, a thin layer of cartilage that reduces friction and
acts as a shock absorber.
FIGURE 6.8
Periosteum and Endosteum
The periosteum forms the outer surface of bone, and the endosteum lines the medullary
cavity.
Flat bones, like those of the cranium, consist of a layer of diploë (spongy bone), lined on either side by a layer of
compact bone (Figure 6.9). The two layers of compact bone and the interior spongy bone work together to protect
the internal organs. If the outer layer of a cranial bone fractures, the brain is still protected by the intact inner layer.
FIGURE 6.9
Anatomy of a Flat Bone
This cross-section of a flat bone shows the spongy bone (diploë) lined on either side by a layer of
compact bone.
Bone Markings
The surface features of bones vary considerably, depending on the function and location in the body. Table 6.2
describes the bone markings, which are illustrated in (Figure 6.10). There are three general classes of bone
markings: (1) articulations, (2) projections, and (3) holes. As the name implies, an articulation is where two bone
surfaces come together (articulus = “joint”). These surfaces tend to conform to one another, such as one being
rounded and the other cupped, to facilitate the function of the articulation. A projection is an area of a bone that
projects above the surface of the bone. These are the attachment points for tendons and ligaments. In general, their
size and shape is an indication of the forces exerted through the attachment to the bone. A hole is an opening or
groove in the bone that allows blood vessels and nerves to enter the bone. As with the other markings, their size and
shape reflect the size of the vessels and nerves that penetrate the bone at these points.

Bone Markings
Marking
Description
Example
Articulations
Where two bones meet
Knee joint
Head
Prominent rounded surface
Head of femur
Facet
Flat surface
Vertebrae
Condyle
Rounded surface
Occipital condyles
Projections
Raised markings
Spinous process of the vertebrae
Protuberance
Protruding
Chin
Process
Prominence feature
Transverse process of vertebra
Spine
Sharp process
Ischial spine
Tubercle
Small, rounded process
Tubercle of humerus
Tuberosity
Rough surface
Deltoid tuberosity
Line
Slight, elongated ridge
Temporal lines of the parietal bones
Crest
Ridge
Iliac crest
Holes
Holes and depressions
Foramen (holes through which blood vessels can pass through)
Fossa
Elongated basin
Mandibular fossa
Fovea
Small pit
Fovea capitis on the head of the femur
Sulcus
Groove
Sigmoid sulcus of the temporal bones
Canal
Passage in bone
Auditory canal
Fissure
Slit through bone
Auricular fissure
Foramen
Hole through bone
Foramen magnum in the occipital bone
Meatus
Opening into canal
External auditory meatus
Sinus
Air-filled space in bone
Nasal sinus
TABLE 6.2

FIGURE 6.10
Bone Features
The surface features of bones depend on their function, location, attachment of ligaments and tendons, or
the penetration of blood vessels and nerves.
Bone Cells and Tissue
Bone contains a relatively small number of cells entrenched in a matrix of collagen fibers that provide a surface for
inorganic salt crystals to adhere. These salt crystals form when calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate combine
to create hydroxyapatite, which incorporates other inorganic salts like magnesium hydroxide, fluoride, and sulfate as
it crystallizes, or calcifies, on the collagen fibers. The hydroxyapatite crystals give bones their hardness and
strength, while the collagen fibers give them flexibility so that they are not brittle.
Although bone cells compose a small amount of the bone volume, they are crucial to the function of bones. Four
types of cells are found within bone tissue: osteoblasts, osteocytes, osteogenic cells, and osteoclasts (Figure 6.11).

FIGURE 6.11
Bone Cells
Four types of cells are found within bone tissue. Osteogenic cells are undifferentiated and develop into
osteoblasts. When osteoblasts get trapped within the calcified matrix, their structure and function changes, and they become osteocytes.
Osteoclasts develop from monocytes and macrophages and differ in appearance from other bone cells.
The osteoblast is the bone cell responsible for forming new bone and is found in the growing portions of bone,
including the periosteum and endosteum. Osteoblasts, which do not divide, synthesize and secrete the collagen
matrix and calcium salts. As the secreted matrix surrounding the osteoblast calcifies, the osteoblast become
trapped within it; as a result, it changes in structure and becomes an osteocyte, the primary cell of mature bone and
the most common type of bone cell. Each osteocyte is located in a space called a lacuna and is surrounded by bone
tissue. Osteocytes maintain the mineral concentration of the matrix via the secretion of enzymes. Like osteoblasts,
osteocytes lack mitotic activity. They can communicate with each other and receive nutrients via long cytoplasmic
processes that extend through canaliculi (singular = canaliculus), channels within the bone matrix.
If osteoblasts and osteocytes are incapable of mitosis, then how are they replenished when old ones die? The
answer lies in the properties of a third category of bone cells—the osteogenic cell. These osteogenic cells are
undifferentiated with high mitotic activity and they are the only bone cells that divide. Immature osteogenic cells are
found in the deep layers of the periosteum and the marrow. They differentiate and develop into osteoblasts.
The dynamic nature of bone means that new tissue is constantly formed, and old, injured, or unnecessary bone is
dissolved for repair or for calcium release. The cell responsible for bone resorption, or breakdown, is the osteoclast.
They are found on bone surfaces, are multinucleated, and originate from monocytes and macrophages, two types of
white blood cells, not from osteogenic cells. Osteoclasts are continually breaking down old bone while osteoblasts
are continually forming new bone. The ongoing balance between osteoblasts and osteoclasts is responsible for the
constant but subtle reshaping of bone. Table 6.3 reviews the bone cells, their functions, and locations.
Bone Cells
Cell type
Function
Location
Osteogenic
cells
Develop into osteoblasts
Deep layers of the periosteum and the marrow
Osteoblasts
Bone formation
Growing portions of bone, including periosteum and
endosteum
TABLE 6.3

Cell type
Function
Location
Osteocytes
Maintain mineral concentration of
matrix
Entrapped in matrix
Osteoclasts
Bone resorption
Bone surfaces and at sites of old, injured, or unneeded
bone
TABLE 6.3
Compact and Spongy Bone
The differences between compact and spongy bone are best explored via their histology. Most bones contain
compact and spongy osseous tissue, but their distribution and concentration vary based on the bone’s overall
function. Compact bone is dense so that it can withstand compressive forces, while spongy (cancellous) bone has
open spaces and supports shifts in weight distribution.
Compact Bone
Compact bone is the denser, stronger of the two types of bone tissue (Figure 6.12). It can be found under the
periosteum and in the diaphyses of long bones, where it provides support and protection.

FIGURE 6.12
Diagram of Compact Bone
(a) This cross-sectional view of compact bone shows the basic structural unit, the osteon. (b)
In this micrograph of the osteon, you can clearly see the concentric lamellae and central canals. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The microscopic structural unit of compact bone is called an osteon, or Haversian system. Each osteon is composed
of concentric rings of calcified matrix called lamellae (singular = lamella). Running down the center of each osteon is
the central canal, or Haversian canal, which contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. These vessels
and nerves branch off at right angles through a perforating canal, also known as Volkmann’s canals, to extend to
the periosteum and endosteum.
The osteocytes are located inside spaces called lacunae (singular = lacuna), found at the borders of adjacent
lamellae. As described earlier, canaliculi connect with the canaliculi of other lacunae and eventually with the central
canal. This system allows nutrients to be transported to the osteocytes and wastes to be removed from them.
Spongy (Cancellous) Bone
Like compact bone, spongy bone, also known as cancellous bone, contains osteocytes housed in lacunae, but they
are not arranged in concentric circles. Instead, the lacunae and osteocytes are found in a lattice-like network of
matrix spikes called trabeculae (singular = trabecula) (Figure 6.13). The trabeculae may appear to be a random
network, but each trabecula forms along lines of stress to provide strength to the bone. The spaces of the
trabeculated network provide balance to the dense and heavy compact bone by making bones lighter so that
muscles can move them more easily. In addition, the spaces in some spongy bones contain red marrow, protected
by the trabeculae, where hematopoiesis occurs.

FIGURE 6.13
Diagram of Spongy Bone
Spongy bone is composed of trabeculae that contain the osteocytes. Red marrow fills the
spaces in some bones.
Aging and the...
Skeletal System: Paget’s Disease
Paget’s disease usually occurs in adults over age 40. It is a disorder of the bone remodeling process that begins
with overactive osteoclasts. This means more bone is resorbed than is laid down. The osteoblasts try to
compensate but the new bone they lay down is weak and brittle and therefore prone to fracture.
While some people with Paget’s disease have no symptoms, others experience pain, bone fractures, and bone
deformities (Figure 6.14). Bones of the pelvis, skull, spine, and legs are the most commonly affected. When
occurring in the skull, Paget’s disease can cause headaches and hearing loss.
FIGURE 6.14
Paget's Disease
Normal leg bones are relatively straight, but those affected by Paget’s disease are porous and
curved.

Blood and Nerve Supply
The spongy bone and medullary cavity receive nourishment from arteries that pass through the compact bone. The
arteries enter through the nutrient foramen (plural = foramina), small openings in the diaphysis (Figure 6.15). The
osteocytes in spongy bone are nourished by blood vessels of the periosteum that penetrate spongy bone and blood
that circulates in the marrow cavities. As the blood passes through the marrow cavities, it is collected by veins,
which then pass out of the bone through the foramina.
In addition to the blood vessels, nerves follow the same paths into the bone where they tend to concentrate in the
more metabolically active regions of the bone. The nerves sense pain, and it appears the nerves also play roles in
regulating blood supplies and in bone growth, hence their concentrations in metabolically active sites of the bone.
FIGURE 6.15
Diagram of Blood and Nerve Supply to Bone
Blood vessels and nerves enter the bone through the nutrient foramen.
What causes the osteoclasts to become overactive? The answer is still unknown, but hereditary factors seem to
play a role. Some scientists believe Paget’s disease is due to an as-yet-unidentified virus.
Paget’s disease is diagnosed via imaging studies and lab tests. X-rays may show bone deformities or areas of
bone resorption. Bone scans are also useful. In these studies, a dye containing a radioactive ion is injected into
the body. Areas of bone resorption have an affinity for the ion, so they will light up on the scan if the ions are
absorbed. In addition, blood levels of an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase are typically elevated in people
with Paget’s disease.
Bisphosphonates, drugs that decrease the activity of osteoclasts, are often used in the treatment of Paget’s
disease. However, in a small percentage of cases, bisphosphonates themselves have been linked to an
increased risk of fractures because the old bone that is left after bisphosphonates are administered becomes
worn out and brittle. Still, most doctors feel that the benefits of bisphosphonates more than outweigh the risk;
the medical professional has to weigh the benefits and risks on a case-by-case basis. Bisphosphonate treatment
can reduce the overall risk of deformities or fractures, which in turn reduces the risk of surgical repair and its
associated risks and complications.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/microbone) to see the microscopic features of a bone.
