3.3 The Nucleus and DNA Replication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and features of the nuclear membrane
•
List the contents of the nucleus
•
Explain the organization of the DNA molecule within the nucleus
•
Describe the process of DNA replication
The nucleus is the largest and most prominent of a cell’s organelles (Figure 3.19). The nucleus is generally
considered the control center of the cell because it stores all of the genetic instructions for manufacturing proteins.
Interestingly, some cells in the body, such as muscle cells, contain more than one nucleus (Figure 3.20), which is
known as multinucleated. Other cells, such as mammalian red blood cells (RBCs), do not contain nuclei at all. RBCs
eject their nuclei as they mature, making space for the large numbers of hemoglobin molecules that carry oxygen
throughout the body (Figure 3.21). Without nuclei, the life span of RBCs is short, and so the body must produce new
ones constantly.
FIGURE 3.19
The Nucleus
The nucleus is the control center of the cell. The nucleus of living cells contains the genetic material that
determines the entire structure and function of that cell.

FIGURE 3.20
Multinucleate Muscle Cell
Unlike cardiac muscle cells and smooth muscle cells, which have a single nucleus, a skeletal
muscle cell contains many nuclei, and is referred to as “multinucleated.” These muscle cells are long and fibrous (often referred to as
muscle fibers). During development, many smaller cells fuse to form a mature muscle fiber. The nuclei of the fused cells are conserved in
the mature cell, thus imparting a multinucleate characteristic to mature muscle cells. LM × 104.3. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/mnucleate) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
FIGURE 3.21
Red Blood Cell Extruding Its Nucleus
Mature red blood cells lack a nucleus. As they mature, erythroblasts extrude their
nucleus, making room for more hemoglobin. The two panels here show an erythroblast before and after ejecting its nucleus, respectively.
(credit: modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/RBC) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail.
Inside the nucleus lies the blueprint that dictates everything a cell will do and all of the products it will make. This
information is stored within DNA. The nucleus sends “commands” to the cell via molecular messengers that
translate the information from DNA. Each cell in your body (with the exception of germ cells) contains the complete
set of your DNA. When a cell divides, the DNA must be duplicated so that the each new cell receives a full
complement of DNA. The following section will explore the structure of the nucleus and its contents, as well as the
process of DNA replication.
Organization of the Nucleus and Its DNA
Like most other cellular organelles, the nucleus is surrounded by a membrane called the nuclear envelope. This
membranous covering consists of two adjacent lipid bilayers with a thin fluid space in between them. Spanning
these two bilayers are nuclear pores. A nuclear pore is a tiny passageway for the passage of proteins, RNA, and
solutes between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Proteins called pore complexes lining the nuclear pores regulate
the passage of materials into and out of the nucleus.
Inside the nuclear envelope is a gel-like nucleoplasm with solutes that include the building blocks of nucleic acids.
There also can be a dark-staining mass often visible under a simple light microscope, called a nucleolus (plural =
nucleoli). The nucleolus is a region of the nucleus that is responsible for manufacturing the RNA necessary for
construction of ribosomes. Once synthesized, newly made ribosomal subunits exit the cell’s nucleus through the
nuclear pores.
The genetic instructions that are used to build and maintain an organism are arranged in an orderly manner in
strands of DNA. Within the nucleus are threads of chromatin composed of DNA and associated proteins (Figure
3.22). Along the chromatin threads, the DNA is wrapped around a set of histone proteins. A nucleosome is a single,
wrapped DNA-histone complex. Multiple nucleosomes along the entire molecule of DNA appear like a beaded
necklace, in which the string is the DNA and the beads are the associated histones. When a cell is in the process of
division, the chromatin condenses into chromosomes, so that the DNA can be safely transported to the “daughter
cells.” The chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins; it is the condensed form of chromatin. It is estimated
that humans have almost 22,000 genes distributed on 46 chromosomes.
FIGURE 3.22
DNA Macrostructure
Strands of DNA are wrapped around supporting histones. These proteins are increasingly bundled
and condensed into chromatin, which is packed tightly into chromosomes when the cell is ready to divide.
DNA Replication
In order for an organism to grow, develop, and maintain its health, cells must reproduce themselves by dividing to
produce two new daughter cells, each with the full complement of DNA as found in the original cell. Billions of new
cells are produced in an adult human every day. Only very few cell types in the body do not divide, including nerve
cells, skeletal muscle fibers, and cardiac muscle cells. The division time of different cell types varies. Epithelial cells
of the skin and gastrointestinal lining, for instance, divide very frequently to replace those that are constantly being
rubbed off of the surface by friction.
A DNA molecule is made of two strands that “complement” each other in the sense that the molecules that
compose the strands fit together and bind to each other, creating a double-stranded molecule that looks much like a
long, twisted ladder. This double helix can be constructed easily because the two strands are antiparallel, meaning
the two strands run in opposite directions. Each side rail of the DNA ladder is composed of alternating sugar and
phosphate groups (Figure 3.23). The two sides of the ladder are not identical, but are complementary. These two
backbones are bonded to each other across pairs of protruding bases, each bonded pair forming one “rung,” or
cross member. The four DNA bases are adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G). Because of their
shape and charge, the two bases that compose a pair always bond together. Adenine always binds with thymine, and
cytosine always binds with guanine. The particular sequence of bases along the DNA molecule determines the
genetic code. Therefore, if the two complementary strands of DNA were pulled apart, you could infer the order of the
bases in one strand from the bases in the other, complementary strand. For example, if one strand has a region with
the sequence AGTGCCT, then the sequence of the complementary strand would be TCACGGA.
FIGURE 3.23
Molecular Structure of DNA
The DNA double helix is composed of two complementary strands. The strands are bonded
together via their nitrogenous base pairs using hydrogen bonds.
DNA replication is the copying of DNA that occurs before cell division can take place. After a great deal of debate
and experimentation, the general method of DNA replication was deduced in 1958 by two scientists in California,
Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl. This method is illustrated in Figure 3.24 and described below.

FIGURE 3.24
DNA Replication
DNA replication faithfully duplicates the entire genome of the cell. During DNA replication, a number of
different enzymes work together to pull apart the two strands so each strand can be used as a template to synthesize new complementary
strands. The two new daughter DNA molecules each contain one pre-existing strand and one newly synthesized strand. Thus, DNA
replication is said to be “semiconservative.”
Stage 1: Initiation. The two complementary strands are separated, much like unzipping a zipper. Special enzymes,
including helicase, untwist and separate the two strands of DNA.
Stage 2: Elongation. Each strand becomes a template along which a new complementary strand is built. DNA
polymerase brings in the correct bases to complement the template strand, synthesizing a new strand base by
base. A DNA polymerase is an enzyme that adds free nucleotides to the end of a chain of DNA, making a new double
strand. This growing strand continues to be built until it has fully complemented the template strand.
Stage 3: Termination. Once the two original strands are bound to their own, finished, complementary strands, DNA
replication is stopped and the two new identical DNA molecules are complete.
Each new DNA molecule contains one strand from the original molecule and one newly synthesized strand. The term
for this mode of replication is “semiconservative,” because half of the original DNA molecule is conserved in each
new DNA molecule. This process continues until the cell’s entire genome, the entire complement of an organism’s
DNA, is replicated. As you might imagine, it is very important that DNA replication take place precisely so that new
cells in the body contain the exact same genetic material as their parent cells. Mistakes made during DNA
replication, such as the accidental addition of an inappropriate nucleotide, have the potential to render a gene
dysfunctional or useless. Fortunately, there are mechanisms in place to minimize such mistakes. A DNA
proofreading process enlists the help of special enzymes that scan the newly synthesized molecule for mistakes and
corrects them. Once the process of DNA replication is complete, the cell is ready to divide. You will explore the
process of cell division later in the chapter.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/DNArep) to learn about DNA replication. DNA replication proceeds
simultaneously at several sites on the same molecule. What separates the base pair at the start of DNA replication?
