INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 11
The Muscular System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the actions and roles of agonists and antagonists
•
Explain the structure and organization of muscle fascicles and their role in generating force
•
Explain the criteria used to name skeletal muscles
•
Identify the skeletal muscles and their actions on the skeleton and soft tissues of the body
•
Identify the origins and insertions of skeletal muscles and the prime movements
Think about the things that you do each day—talking, walking, sitting, standing, and running—all of
these activities require movement of particular skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles are even used during sleep. The
diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscle that has to contract and relax for you to breathe day and night. If you recall
from your study of the skeletal system and joints, body movement occurs around the joints in the body. The focus of
this chapter is on skeletal muscle organization. The system to name skeletal muscles will be explained; in some
cases, the muscle is named by its shape, and in other cases it is named by its location or attachments to the
skeleton. If you understand the meaning of the name of the muscle, often it will help you remember its location and/
or what it does. This chapter also will describe how skeletal muscles are arranged to accomplish movement, and
how other muscles may assist, or be arranged on the skeleton to resist or carry out the opposite movement. The
actions of the skeletal muscles will be covered in a regional manner, working from the head down to the toes.
11.1 Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their
Lever Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast agonist and antagonist muscles
•
Describe how fascicles are arranged within a skeletal muscle
•
Explain the major events of a skeletal muscle contraction within a muscle in generating force
Figure 11.1
A Body in Motion The muscular system allows us to move, flex and contort our bodies. Practicing yoga, as pictured here, is a
good example of the voluntary use of the muscular system. (credit: Dmitry Yanchylenko)
To move the skeleton, the tension created by the contraction of the fibers in most skeletal muscles is transferred to
the tendons. The tendons are strong bands of dense, regular connective tissue that connect muscles to bones. The
bone connection is why this muscle tissue is called skeletal muscle.
Interactions of Skeletal Muscles in the Body
To pull on a bone, that is, to change the angle at its synovial joint, which essentially moves the skeleton, a skeletal
muscle must also be attached to a fixed part of the skeleton. The moveable end of the muscle that attaches to the
bone being pulled is called the muscle’s insertion, and the end of the muscle attached to a fixed (stabilized) bone is
called the origin. During forearm flexion—bending the elbow—the brachioradialis assists the brachialis.
Although a number of muscles may be involved in an action, the principal muscle involved is called the prime
mover, or agonist. To lift a cup, a muscle called the biceps brachii is actually the prime mover; however, because it
can be assisted by the brachialis, the brachialis is called a synergist in this action (Figure 11.2). A synergist can also
be a fixator that stabilizes the bone that is the attachment for the prime mover’s origin.
FIGURE 11.2
Prime Movers and Synergists
The biceps brachii flex the lower arm. The brachoradialis, in the forearm, and brachialis,
located deep to the biceps in the upper arm, are both synergists that aid in this motion.
A muscle with the opposite action of the prime mover is called an antagonist. Antagonists play two important roles
in muscle function: (1) they maintain body or limb position, such as holding the arm out or standing erect; and (2)
they control rapid movement, as in shadow boxing without landing a punch or the ability to check the motion of a
limb.
For example, to extend the knee, a group of four muscles called the quadriceps femoris in the anterior compartment
of the thigh are activated (and would be called the agonists of knee extension). However, to flex the knee joint, an
opposite or antagonistic set of muscles called the hamstrings is activated.
As you can see, these terms would also be reversed for the opposing action. If you consider the first action as the
knee bending, the hamstrings would be called the agonists and the quadriceps femoris would then be called the
antagonists. See Table 11.1 for a list of some agonists and antagonists.

Agonist and Antagonist Skeletal Muscle Pairs
Agonist
Antagonist
Movement
Biceps brachii: in the anterior
compartment of the arm
Triceps brachii: in the
posterior
compartment of the
arm
The biceps brachii flexes the forearm, whereas the
triceps brachii extends it.
Hamstrings: group of three
muscles in the posterior
compartment of the thigh
Quadriceps femoris:
group of four muscles
in the anterior
compartment of the
thigh
The hamstrings flex the leg, whereas the quadriceps
femoris extend it.
Flexor digitorum superficialis
and flexor digitorum
profundus: in the anterior
compartment of the forearm
Extensor digitorum: in
the posterior
compartment of the
forearm
The flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum
profundus flex the fingers and the hand at the wrist,
whereas the extensor digitorum extends the fingers
and the hand at the wrist.
TABLE 11.1
There are also skeletal muscles that do not pull against the skeleton for movements. For example, there are the
muscles that produce facial expressions. The insertions and origins of facial muscles are in the skin, so that certain
individual muscles contract to form a smile or frown, form sounds or words, and raise the eyebrows. There also are
skeletal muscles in the tongue, and the external urinary and anal sphincters that allow for voluntary regulation of
urination and defecation, respectively. In addition, the diaphragm contracts and relaxes to change the volume of the
pleural cavities but it does not move the skeleton to do this.
Patterns of Fascicle Organization
Skeletal muscle is enclosed in connective tissue scaffolding at three levels. Each muscle fiber (cell) is covered by
endomysium and the entire muscle is covered by epimysium. When a group of muscle fibers is “bundled” as a unit
within the whole muscle by an additional covering of a connective tissue called perimysium, that bundled group of
muscle fibers is called a fascicle. Fascicle arrangement by perimysia is correlated to the force generated by a
muscle; it also affects the range of motion of the muscle. Based on the patterns of fascicle arrangement, skeletal
muscles can be classified in several ways. What follows are the most common fascicle arrangements.
Everyday Connection
Exercise and Stretching
When exercising, it is important to first warm up the muscles. Stretching pulls on the muscle fibers and it also
results in an increased blood flow to the muscles being worked. Without a proper warm-up, it is possible that
you may either damage some of the muscle fibers or pull a tendon. A pulled tendon, regardless of location,
results in pain, swelling, and diminished function; if it is moderate to severe, the injury could immobilize you for
an extended period.
Recall the discussion about muscles crossing joints to create movement. Most of the joints you use during
exercise are synovial joints, which have synovial fluid in the joint space between two bones. Exercise and
stretching may also have a beneficial effect on synovial joints. Synovial fluid is a thin, but viscous film with the
consistency of egg whites. When you first get up and start moving, your joints feel stiff for a number of reasons.
After proper stretching and warm-up, the synovial fluid may become less viscous, allowing for better joint
function.

Parallel muscles have fascicles that are arranged in the same direction as the long axis of the muscle (Figure 11.3).
The majority of skeletal muscles in the body have this type of organization. Some parallel muscles are flat sheets
that expand at the ends to make broad attachments. Other parallel muscles are rotund with tendons at one or both
ends. Muscles that seem to be plump have a large mass of tissue located in the middle of the muscle, between the
insertion and the origin, which is known as the central body. A more common name for this muscle is belly. When a
muscle contracts, the contractile fibers shorten it to an even larger bulge. For example, extend and then flex your
biceps brachii muscle; the large, middle section is the belly (Figure 11.4). When a parallel muscle has a central,
large belly that is spindle-shaped, meaning it tapers as it extends to its origin and insertion, it sometimes is called
fusiform.
FIGURE 11.3
Muscle Shapes and Fiber Alignment
The skeletal muscles of the body typically come in seven different general shapes.

FIGURE 11.4
Biceps Brachii Muscle Contraction
The large mass at the center of a muscle is called the belly. Tendons emerge from
both ends of the belly and connect the muscle to the bones, allowing the skeleton to move. The tendons of the bicep connect to the upper
arm and the forearm. (credit: Victoria Garcia)
Circular muscles are also called sphincters (see Figure 11.3). When they relax, the sphincters’ concentrically
arranged bundles of muscle fibers increase the size of the opening, and when they contract, the size of the opening
shrinks to the point of closure. The orbicularis oris muscle is a circular muscle that goes around the mouth. When it
contracts, the oral opening becomes smaller, as when puckering the lips for whistling. Another example is the
orbicularis oculi, one of which surrounds each eye. Consider, for example, the names of the two orbicularis muscles
(orbicularis oris and oribicularis oculi), where part of the first name of both muscles is the same. The first part of
orbicularis, orb (orb = “circular”), is a reference to a round or circular structure; it may also make one think of orbit,
such as the moon’s path around the earth. The word oris (oris = “oral”) refers to the oral cavity, or the mouth. The
word oculi (ocular = “eye”) refers to the eye.
There are other muscles throughout the body named by their shape or location. The deltoid is a large, triangular-
shaped muscle that covers the shoulder. It is so-named because the Greek letter delta looks like a triangle. The
rectus abdominis (rector = “straight”) is the straight muscle in the anterior wall of the abdomen, while the rectus
femoris is the straight muscle in the anterior compartment of the thigh.
When a muscle has a widespread expansion over a sizable area, but then the fascicles come to a single, common
attachment point, the muscle is called convergent. The attachment point for a convergent muscle could be a
tendon, an aponeurosis (a flat, broad tendon), or a raphe (a very slender tendon). The large muscle on the chest, the
pectoralis major, is an example of a convergent muscle because it converges on the greater tubercle of the humerus
via a tendon. The temporalis muscle of the cranium is another.
Pennate muscles (penna = “feathers”) blend into a tendon that runs through the central region of the muscle for its
whole length, somewhat like the quill of a feather with the muscle arranged similar to the feathers. Due to this
design, the muscle fibers in a pennate muscle can only pull at an angle, and as a result, contracting pennate muscles
do not move their tendons very far. However, because a pennate muscle generally can hold more muscle fibers
within it, it can produce relatively more tension for its size. There are three subtypes of pennate muscles.
In a unipennate muscle, the fascicles are located on one side of the tendon. The extensor digitorum of the forearm
is an example of a unipennate muscle. A bipennate muscle has fascicles on both sides of the tendon. In some
pennate muscles, the muscle fibers wrap around the tendon, sometimes forming individual fascicles in the process.
This arrangement is referred to as multipennate. A common example is the deltoid muscle of the shoulder, which
covers the shoulder but has a single tendon that inserts on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.

Because of fascicles, a portion of a multipennate muscle like the deltoid can be stimulated by the nervous system to
change the direction of the pull. For example, when the deltoid muscle contracts, the arm abducts (moves away
from midline in the sagittal plane), but when only the anterior fascicle is stimulated, the arm will abduct and flex
(move anteriorly at the shoulder joint).
The Lever System of Muscle and Bone Interactions
Skeletal muscles do not work by themselves. Muscles are arranged in pairs based on their functions. For muscles
attached to the bones of the skeleton, the connection determines the force, speed, and range of movement. These
characteristics depend on each other and can explain the general organization of the muscular and skeletal
systems.
The skeleton and muscles act together to move the body. Have you ever used the back of a hammer to remove a nail
from wood? The handle acts as a lever and the head of the hammer acts as a fulcrum, the fixed point that the force
is applied to when you pull back or push down on the handle. The effort applied to this system is the pulling or
pushing on the handle to remove the nail, which is the load, or “resistance” to the movement of the handle in the
system. Our musculoskeletal system works in a similar manner, with bones being stiff levers and the articular
endings of the bones—encased in synovial joints—acting as fulcrums. The load would be an object being lifted or any
resistance to a movement (your head is a load when you are lifting it), and the effort, or applied force, comes from
contracting skeletal muscle.
