11.2 Naming Skeletal Muscles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the criteria used to name skeletal muscles
•
Explain how understanding the muscle names helps describe shapes, location, and actions of various muscles
The Greeks and Romans conducted the first studies done on the human body in Western culture. The educated
class of subsequent societies studied Latin and Greek, and therefore the early pioneers of anatomy continued to
apply Latin and Greek terminology or roots when they named the skeletal muscles. The large number of muscles in
the body and unfamiliar words can make learning the names of the muscles in the body seem daunting, but
understanding the etymology can help. Etymology is the study of how the root of a particular word entered a
language and how the use of the word evolved over time. Taking the time to learn the root of the words is crucial to
understanding the vocabulary of anatomy and physiology. When you understand the names of muscles it will help
you remember where the muscles are located and what they do (Figure 11.5, Figure 11.6, and Table 11.2).
Pronunciation of words and terms will take a bit of time to master, but after you have some basic information; the
correct names and pronunciations will become easier.

FIGURE 11.5
Overview of the Muscular System
On the anterior and posterior views of the muscular system above, superficial
muscles (those at the surface) are shown on the right side of the body while deep muscles (those underneath the superficial muscles) are
shown on the left half of the body. For the legs, superficial muscles are shown in the anterior view while the posterior view shows both
superficial and deep muscles.
FIGURE 11.6
Understanding a Muscle Name from the Latin
Mnemonic Device for Latin Roots
Example
Latin or Greek Translation
Mnemonic Device
ad
to; toward
ADvance toward your goal
ab
away from
n/a
sub
under
SUBmarines move under water.
ductor
something that moves
A conDUCTOR makes a train move.
anti
against
If you are antisocial, you are against engaging in social activities.
epi
on top of
n/a
apo
to the side of
n/a
longissimus
longest
“Longissimus” is longer than the word “long.”
longus
long
long
brevis
short
brief
maximus
large
max
medius
medium
“Medius” and “medium” both begin with “med.”
minimus
tiny; little
mini
rectus
straight
To RECTify a situation is to straighten it out.
multi
many
If something is MULTIcolored, it has many colors.
uni
one
A UNIcorn has one horn.
TABLE 11.2

Example
Latin or Greek Translation
Mnemonic Device
bi/di
two
If a ring is DIcast, it is made of two metals.
tri
three
TRIple the amount of money is three times as much.
quad
four
QUADruplets are four children born at one birth.
externus
outside
EXternal
internus
inside
INternal
TABLE 11.2
Anatomists name the skeletal muscles according to a number of criteria, each of which describes the muscle in
some way. These include naming the muscle after its shape, its size compared to other muscles in the area, its
location in the body or the location of its attachments to the skeleton, how many origins it has, or its action.
The skeletal muscle’s anatomical location or its relationship to a particular bone often determines its name. For
example, the frontalis muscle is located on top of the frontal bone of the skull. Similarly, the shapes of some
muscles are very distinctive and the names, such as orbicularis, reflect the shape. For the buttocks, the size of the
muscles influences the names: gluteus maximus (largest), gluteus medius (medium), and the gluteus minimus
(smallest). Names were given to indicate length—brevis (short), longus (long)—and to identify position relative to
the midline: lateralis (to the outside away from the midline), and medialis (toward the midline). The direction of the
muscle fibers and fascicles are used to describe muscles relative to the midline, such as the rectus (straight)
abdominis, or the oblique (at an angle) muscles of the abdomen.
Some muscle names indicate the number of muscles in a group. One example of this is the quadriceps, a group of
four muscles located on the anterior (front) thigh. Other muscle names can provide information as to how many
origins a particular muscle has, such as the biceps brachii. The prefix bi indicates that the muscle has two origins
and tri indicates three origins.
The location of a muscle’s attachment can also appear in its name. When the name of a muscle is based on the
attachments, the origin is always named first. For instance, the sternocleidomastoid muscle of the neck has a dual
origin on the sternum (sterno) and clavicle (cleido), and it inserts on the mastoid process of the temporal bone. The
last feature by which to name a muscle is its action. When muscles are named for the movement they produce, one
can find action words in their name. Some examples are flexor (decreases the angle at the joint), extensor
(increases the angle at the joint), abductor (moves the bone away from the midline), or adductor (moves the bone
toward the midline).
