10.7 Cardiac Muscle Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe intercalated discs and gap junctions
•
Describe a desmosome
Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart. Highly coordinated contractions of cardiac muscle pump blood into
the vessels of the circulatory system. Similar to skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is striated and organized into
sarcomeres, possessing the same banding organization as skeletal muscle (Figure 10.21). However, cardiac muscle
fibers are shorter than skeletal muscle fibers and usually contain only one nucleus, which is located in the central
region of the cell. Cardiac muscle fibers also possess many mitochondria and myoglobin, as ATP is produced
primarily through aerobic metabolism. Cardiac muscle fibers cells also are extensively branched and are connected
to one another at their ends by intercalated discs. An intercalated disc allows the cardiac muscle cells to contract in
a wave-like pattern so that the heart can work as a pump.

Everyday Connection
Aging and Muscle Tissue
Although atrophy due to disuse can often be reversed with exercise, muscle atrophy with age, referred to as
sarcopenia, is irreversible. This is a primary reason why even highly trained athletes succumb to declining
performance with age. This decline is noticeable in athletes whose sports require strength and powerful
movements, such as sprinting, whereas the effects of age are less noticeable in endurance athletes such as
marathon runners or long-distance cyclists. As muscles age, muscle fibers die, and they are replaced by
connective tissue and adipose tissue (Figure 10.20). Because those tissues cannot contract and generate force
as muscle can, muscles lose the ability to produce powerful contractions. The decline in muscle mass causes a
loss of strength, including the strength required for posture and mobility. This may be caused by a reduction in
FG fibers that hydrolyze ATP quickly to produce short, powerful contractions. Muscles in older people
sometimes possess greater numbers of SO fibers, which are responsible for longer contractions and do not
produce powerful movements. There may also be a reduction in the size of motor units, resulting in fewer fibers
being stimulated and less muscle tension being produced.
FIGURE 10.20
Atrophy
Muscle mass is reduced as muscles atrophy with disuse.
Sarcopenia can be delayed to some extent by exercise, as training adds structural proteins and causes cellular
changes that can offset the effects of atrophy. Increased exercise can produce greater numbers of cellular
mitochondria, increase capillary density, and increase the mass and strength of connective tissue. The effects of
age-related atrophy are especially pronounced in people who are sedentary, as the loss of muscle cells is
displayed as functional impairments such as trouble with locomotion, balance, and posture. This can lead to a
decrease in quality of life and medical problems, such as joint problems because the muscles that stabilize
bones and joints are weakened. Problems with locomotion and balance can also cause various injuries due to
falls.

FIGURE 10.21
Cardiac Muscle Tissue
Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/cardmuscleMG) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
Intercalated discs are part of the sarcolemma and contain two structures important in cardiac muscle contraction:
gap junctions and desmosomes. A gap junction forms channels between adjacent cardiac muscle fibers that allow
the depolarizing current produced by cations to flow from one cardiac muscle cell to the next. This joining is called
electric coupling, and in cardiac muscle it allows the quick transmission of action potentials and the coordinated
contraction of the entire heart. This network of electrically connected cardiac muscle cells creates a functional unit
of contraction called a syncytium. The remainder of the intercalated disc is composed of desmosomes. A
desmosome is a cell structure that anchors the ends of cardiac muscle fibers together so the cells do not pull apart
during the stress of individual fibers contracting (Figure 10.22).
FIGURE 10.22
Cardiac Muscle
Intercalated discs are part of the cardiac muscle sarcolemma and they contain gap junctions and
desmosomes.

Contractions of the heart (heartbeats) are controlled by specialized cardiac muscle cells called pacemaker cells that
directly control heart rate. Although cardiac muscle cannot be consciously controlled, the pacemaker cells respond
to signals from the autonomic nervous system (ANS) to speed up or slow down the heart rate. The pacemaker cells
can also respond to various hormones that modulate heart rate to control blood pressure.
The wave of contraction that allows the heart to work as a unit, called a functional syncytium, begins with the
pacemaker cells. This group of cells is self-excitable and able to depolarize to threshold and fire action potentials on
their own, a feature called autorhythmicity; they do this at set intervals which determine heart rate. Because they
are connected with gap junctions to surrounding muscle fibers and the specialized fibers of the heart’s conduction
system, the pacemaker cells are able to transfer the depolarization to the other cardiac muscle fibers in a manner
that allows the heart to contract in a coordinated manner.
Another feature of cardiac muscle is its relatively long action potentials in its fibers, having a sustained
depolarization “plateau.” The plateau is produced by Ca++ entry though voltage-gated calcium channels in the
sarcolemma of cardiac muscle fibers. This sustained depolarization (and Ca++ entry) provides for a longer
contraction than is produced by an action potential in skeletal muscle. Unlike skeletal muscle, a large percentage of
the Ca++ that initiates contraction in cardiac muscles comes from outside the cell rather than from the SR.
