INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 17
The Endocrine System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the contributions of the endocrine system to homeostasis
•
Discuss the chemical composition of hormones and the mechanisms of hormone action
•
Summarize the site of production, regulation, and effects of the hormones of the pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, adrenal, and pineal glands
•
Discuss the hormonal regulation of the reproductive system
•
Explain the role of the pancreatic endocrine cells in the regulation of blood glucose
•
Identify the hormones released by the heart, kidneys, and other organs with secondary endocrine functions
•
Discuss several common diseases associated with endocrine system dysfunction
•
Discuss the embryonic development of, and the effects of aging on, the endocrine system
You may never have thought of it this way, but when you send a text message to two friends to
meet you at the dining hall at six, you’re sending digital signals that (you hope) will affect their behavior—even
though they are some distance away. Similarly, certain cells send chemical signals to other cells in the body that
influence their behavior. This long-distance intercellular communication, coordination, and control is critical for
homeostasis, and it is the fundamental function of the endocrine system.
17.1 An Overview of the Endocrine System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the types of intercellular communication, their importance, mechanisms, and effects
•
Identify the major organs and tissues of the endocrine system and their location in the body
Communication is a process in which a sender transmits signals to one or more receivers to control and coordinate
actions. In the human body, two major organ systems participate in relatively “long distance” communication: the
nervous system and the endocrine system. Together, these two systems are primarily responsible for maintaining
Figure 17.1
A Child Catches a Falling Leaf Hormones of the endocrine system coordinate and control growth, metabolism, temperature
regulation, the stress response, reproduction, and many other functions. (credit: “seenthroughmylense”/flickr.com)
homeostasis in the body.
Neural and Endocrine Signaling
The nervous system uses two types of intercellular communication—electrical and chemical signaling—either by the
direct action of an electrical potential, or in the latter case, through the action of chemical neurotransmitters such as
serotonin or norepinephrine. Neurotransmitters act locally and rapidly. When an electrical signal in the form of an
action potential arrives at the synaptic terminal, they diffuse across the synaptic cleft (the gap between a sending
neuron and a receiving neuron or muscle cell). Once the neurotransmitters interact (bind) with receptors on the
receiving (post-synaptic) cell, the receptor stimulation is transduced into a response such as continued electrical
signaling or modification of cellular response. The target cell responds within milliseconds of receiving the chemical
“message”; this response then ceases very quickly once the neural signaling ends. In this way, neural
communication enables body functions that involve quick, brief actions, such as movement, sensation, and
cognition.In contrast, the endocrine system uses just one method of communication: chemical signaling. These
signals are sent by the endocrine organs, which secrete chemicals—the hormone—into the extracellular fluid.
Hormones are transported primarily via the bloodstream throughout the body, where they bind to receptors on
target cells, inducing a characteristic response. As a result, endocrine signaling requires more time than neural
signaling to prompt a response in target cells, though the precise amount of time varies with different hormones. For
example, the hormones released when you are confronted with a dangerous or frightening situation, called the fight-
or-flight response, occur by the release of adrenal hormones—epinephrine and norepinephrine—within seconds. In
contrast, it may take up to 48 hours for target cells to respond to certain reproductive hormones.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/hormonebind) to watch an animation of the events that occur when a hormone
binds to a cell membrane receptor. What is the secondary messenger made by adenylyl cyclase during the activation
of liver cells by epinephrine?
In addition, endocrine signaling is typically less specific than neural signaling. The same hormone may play a role in
a variety of different physiological processes depending on the target cells involved. For example, the hormone
oxytocin promotes uterine contractions in people in labor. It is also important in breastfeeding, and may be involved
in the sexual response and in feelings of emotional attachment in humans.
In general, the nervous system involves quick responses to rapid changes in the external environment, and the
endocrine system is usually slower acting—taking care of the internal environment of the body, maintaining
homeostasis, and controlling reproduction (Table 17.1). So how does the fight-or-flight response that was
mentioned earlier happen so quickly if hormones are usually slower acting? It is because the two systems are
connected. It is the fast action of the nervous system in response to the danger in the environment that stimulates
the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones. As a result, the nervous system can cause rapid endocrine responses
to keep up with sudden changes in both the external and internal environments when necessary.
Endocrine and Nervous Systems
Endocrine system
Nervous system
Signaling mechanism(s)
Chemical
Chemical/electrical
Primary chemical signal
Hormones
Neurotransmitters
Distance traveled
Long or short
Always short
TABLE 17.1

Endocrine system
Nervous system
Response time
Fast or slow
Always fast
Environment targeted
Internal
Internal and external
TABLE 17.1
Structures of the Endocrine System
The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and organs that secrete hormones as a primary or secondary
function. The endocrine gland is the major player in this system. The primary function of these ductless glands is to
secrete their hormones directly into the surrounding fluid. The interstitial fluid and the blood vessels then transport
the hormones throughout the body. The endocrine system includes the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal, and
pineal glands (Figure 17.2). Some of these glands have both endocrine and non-endocrine functions. For example,
the pancreas contains cells that function in digestion as well as cells that secrete the hormones insulin and
glucagon, which regulate blood glucose levels. The hypothalamus, thymus, heart, kidneys, stomach, small intestine,
liver, skin, ovaries, and testes are other organs that contain cells with endocrine function. Moreover, adipose tissue
has long been known to produce hormones, and recent research has revealed that even bone tissue has endocrine
functions.
FIGURE 17.2
Endocrine System
Endocrine glands and cells are located throughout the body and play an important role in
homeostasis.
The ductless endocrine glands are not to be confused with the body’s exocrine system, whose glands release their
secretions through ducts. Examples of exocrine glands include the sebaceous and sweat glands of the skin. As just
noted, the pancreas also has an exocrine function: most of its cells secrete pancreatic juice through the pancreatic
and accessory ducts to the lumen of the small intestine.
Other Types of Chemical Signaling
In endocrine signaling, hormones secreted into the extracellular fluid diffuse into the blood or lymph, and can then
travel great distances throughout the body. In contrast, autocrine signaling takes place within the same cell. An
autocrine (auto- = “self”) is a chemical that elicits a response in the same cell that secreted it. Interleukin-1, or
IL-1, is a signaling molecule that plays an important role in inflammatory response. The cells that secrete IL-1 have
receptors on their cell surface that bind these molecules, resulting in autocrine signaling.
Local intercellular communication is the province of the paracrine, also called a paracrine factor, which is a
chemical that induces a response in neighboring cells. Although paracrines may enter the bloodstream, their
concentration is generally too low to elicit a response from distant tissues. A familiar example to those with asthma
is histamine, a paracrine that is released by immune cells in the bronchial tree. Histamine causes the smooth
muscle cells of the bronchi to constrict, narrowing the airways. Another example is the neurotransmitters of the
nervous system, which act only locally within the synaptic cleft.

CAREER CONNECTION
Endocrinologist
Endocrinology is a specialty in the field of medicine that focuses on the treatment of endocrine system disorders.
Endocrinologists—medical doctors who specialize in this field—are experts in treating diseases associated with
hormonal systems, ranging from thyroid disease to diabetes mellitus. Endocrine surgeons treat endocrine disease
through the removal, or resection, of the affected endocrine gland.
Patients who are referred to endocrinologists may have signs and symptoms or blood test results that suggest
excessive or impaired functioning of an endocrine gland or endocrine cells. The endocrinologist may order additional
blood tests to determine whether the patient’s hormonal levels are abnormal, or they may stimulate or suppress the
function of the suspect endocrine gland and then have blood taken for analysis. Treatment varies according to the
diagnosis. Some endocrine disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, may respond to lifestyle changes such as modest
weight loss, adoption of a healthy diet, and regular physical activity. Other disorders may require medication, such
as hormone replacement, and routine monitoring by the endocrinologist. These include disorders of the pituitary
gland that can affect growth and disorders of the thyroid gland that can result in a variety of metabolic problems.
Some patients experience health problems as a result of the normal decline in hormones that can accompany aging.
These patients can consult with an endocrinologist to weigh the risks and benefits of hormone replacement therapy
intended to boost their natural levels of reproductive hormones.
In addition to treating patients, endocrinologists may be involved in research to improve the understanding of
endocrine system disorders and develop new treatments for these diseases.
