17.2 Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the three major classes of hormones on the basis of chemical structure
•
Compare and contrast intracellular and cell membrane hormone receptors
•
Describe signaling pathways that involve cAMP and IP3
•
Identify several factors that influence a target cell’s response
•
Discuss the role of feedback loops and humoral, hormonal, and neural stimuli in hormone control
Although a given hormone may travel throughout the body in the bloodstream, it will affect the activity only of its
target cells; that is, cells with receptors for that particular hormone. Once the hormone binds to the receptor, a chain
of events is initiated that leads to the target cell’s response. Hormones play a critical role in the regulation of
physiological processes because of the target cell responses they regulate. These responses contribute to human
reproduction, growth and development of body tissues, metabolism, fluid, and electrolyte balance, sleep, and many
other body functions. The major hormones of the human body and their effects are identified in Table 17.2.
Endocrine Glands and Their Major Hormones
Endocrine
gland
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Pituitary
(anterior)
Growth hormone
(GH)
Protein
Promotes growth of body tissues
Pituitary
(anterior)
Prolactin (PRL)
Peptide
Promotes milk production
Pituitary
(anterior)
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates thyroid hormone release
Pituitary
(anterior)
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
Peptide
Stimulates hormone release by adrenal cortex
Pituitary
(anterior)
Follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates gamete production
Pituitary
(anterior)
Luteinizing
hormone (LH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates androgen production by gonads
Pituitary
(posterior)
Antidiuretic
hormone (ADH)
Peptide
Stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys
Pituitary
(posterior)
Oxytocin
Peptide
Stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth
Thyroid
Thyroxine (T4),
triiodothyronine
(T3)
Amine
Stimulate basal metabolic rate
Thyroid
Calcitonin
Peptide
Reduces blood Ca2+ levels
Parathyroid
Parathyroid
hormone (PTH)
Peptide
Increases blood Ca2+ levels
Adrenal
(cortex)
Aldosterone
Steroid
Increases blood Na+ levels
Adrenal
(cortex)
Cortisol,
corticosterone,
cortisone
Steroid
Increase blood glucose levels
Adrenal
(medulla)
Epinephrine,
norepinephrine
Amine
Stimulate fight-or-flight response
Pineal
Melatonin
Amine
Regulates sleep cycles
TABLE 17.2

Endocrine
gland
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Pancreas
Insulin
Protein
Reduces blood glucose levels
Pancreas
Glucagon
Protein
Increases blood glucose levels
Testes
Testosterone
Steroid
Stimulates development of sex characteristics including a
deeper voice, increased muscle mass, development of
body hair, and sperm production
Ovaries
Estrogens and
progesterone
Steroid
Stimulate development of sex characteristics including the
development of adipose and breast tissue, and prepare the
body for childbirth
TABLE 17.2
Types of Hormones
The hormones of the human body can be divided into two major groups on the basis of their chemical structure.
Hormones derived from amino acids include amines, peptides, and proteins. Those derived from lipids include
steroids (Figure 17.3). These chemical groups affect a hormone’s distribution, the type of receptors it binds to, and
other aspects of its function.

FIGURE 17.3
Amine, Peptide, Protein, and Steroid Hormone Structure
Amine Hormones
Hormones derived from the modification of amino acids are referred to as amine hormones. Typically, the original
structure of the amino acid is modified such that a –COOH, or carboxyl, group is removed, whereas the, or amine, group remains.
Amine hormones are synthesized from the amino acids tryptophan or tyrosine. An example of a hormone derived
from tryptophan is melatonin, which is secreted by the pineal gland and helps regulate circadian rhythm. Tyrosine
derivatives include the metabolism-regulating thyroid hormones, as well as the catecholamines, such as
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are secreted by the adrenal medulla
and play a role in the fight-or-flight response, whereas dopamine is secreted by the hypothalamus and inhibits the
release of certain anterior pituitary hormones.
Peptide and Protein Hormones
Whereas the amine hormones are derived from a single amino acid, peptide and protein hormones consist of
multiple amino acids that link to form an amino acid chain. Peptide hormones consist of short chains of amino acids,
whereas protein hormones are longer polypeptides. Both types are synthesized like other body proteins: DNA is
transcribed into mRNA, which is translated into an amino acid chain.
Examples of peptide hormones include antidiuretic hormone (ADH), a pituitary hormone important in fluid balance,
and atrial-natriuretic peptide, which is produced by the heart and helps to decrease blood pressure. Some examples
of protein hormones include growth hormone, which is produced by the pituitary gland, and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), which has an attached carbohydrate group and is thus classified as a glycoprotein. FSH helps
stimulate the maturation of eggs in the ovaries and sperm in the testes.
Steroid Hormones
The primary hormones derived from lipids are steroids. Steroid hormones are derived from the lipid cholesterol. For
example, the reproductive hormones testosterone and the estrogens—which are produced by the gonads (testes
and ovaries)—are steroid hormones. The adrenal glands produce the steroid hormone aldosterone, which is involved
in osmoregulation, and cortisol, which plays a role in metabolism.
Like cholesterol, steroid hormones are not soluble in water (they are hydrophobic). Because blood is water-based,
lipid-derived hormones must travel to their target cell bound to a transport protein. This more complex structure
extends the half-life of steroid hormones much longer than that of hormones derived from amino acids. A hormone’s
half-life is the time required for half the concentration of the hormone to be degraded. For example, the lipid-
derived hormone cortisol has a half-life of approximately 60 to 90 minutes. In contrast, the amino acid–derived
hormone epinephrine has a half-life of approximately one minute.
Pathways of Hormone Action
The message a hormone sends is received by a hormone receptor, a protein located either inside the cell or within
the cell membrane. The receptor will process the message by initiating other signaling events or cellular
mechanisms that result in the target cell’s response. Hormone receptors recognize molecules with specific shapes
and side groups, and respond only to those hormones that are recognized. The same type of receptor may be
located on cells in different body tissues, and trigger somewhat different responses. Thus, the response triggered by
a hormone depends not only on the hormone, but also on the target cell.
Once the target cell receives the hormone signal, it can respond in a variety of ways. The response may include the
stimulation of protein synthesis, activation or deactivation of enzymes, alteration in the permeability of the cell
membrane, altered rates of mitosis and cell growth, and stimulation of the secretion of products. Moreover, a single
hormone may be capable of inducing different responses in a given cell.
Pathways Involving Intracellular Hormone Receptors
Intracellular hormone receptors are located inside the cell. Hormones that bind to this type of receptor must be able
to cross the cell membrane. Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and therefore can readily diffuse
through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane to reach the intracellular receptor (Figure 17.4). Thyroid hormones,
cross the cell membrane by a specific carrier-mediated mechanism that is energy and Na+ dependent.
The location of steroid and thyroid hormone binding differs slightly: a steroid hormone may bind to its receptor
within the cytosol or within the nucleus. In either case, this binding generates a hormone-receptor complex that
moves toward the chromatin in the cell nucleus and binds to a particular segment of the cell’s DNA. In contrast,
thyroid hormones bind to receptors already bound to DNA. For both steroid and thyroid hormones, binding of the
hormone-receptor complex with DNA triggers transcription of a target gene to mRNA, which moves to the cytosol
and directs protein synthesis by ribosomes.

FIGURE 17.4
Binding of Lipid-Soluble Hormones
A steroid hormone directly initiates the production of proteins within a target cell.
Steroid hormones easily diffuse through the cell membrane. The hormone binds to its receptor in the cytosol, forming a receptor–hormone
complex. The receptor–hormone complex then enters the nucleus and binds to the target gene on the DNA. Transcription of the gene
creates a messenger RNA that is translated into the desired protein within the cytoplasm.
Pathways Involving Cell Membrane Hormone Receptors
Hydrophilic, or water-soluble, hormones are unable to diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane and
must therefore pass on their message to a receptor located at the surface of the cell. Except for thyroid hormones,
which are lipid-soluble, all amino acid–derived hormones bind to cell membrane receptors that are located, at least
in part, on the extracellular surface of the cell membrane. Therefore, they do not directly affect the transcription of
target genes, but instead initiate a signaling cascade that is carried out by a molecule called a second messenger.
In this case, the hormone is called a first messenger.
The second messenger used by most hormones is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). In the cAMP second
messenger system, a water-soluble hormone binds to its receptor in the cell membrane (Step 1 in Figure 17.5). This
receptor is associated with an intracellular component called a G protein, and binding of the hormone activates the
G-protein component (Step 2). The activated G protein in turn activates an enzyme called adenylyl cyclase, also
known as adenylate cyclase (Step 3), which converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cAMP (Step 4). As the second
messenger, cAMP activates a type of enzyme called a protein kinase that is present in the cytosol (Step 5).
Activated protein kinases initiate a phosphorylation cascade, in which multiple protein kinases phosphorylate (add
a phosphate group to) numerous and various cellular proteins, including other enzymes (Step 6).

FIGURE 17.5
Binding of Water-Soluble Hormones
Water-soluble hormones cannot diffuse through the cell membrane. These
hormones must bind to a surface cell-membrane receptor. The receptor then initiates a cell-signaling pathway within the cell involving G
proteins, adenylyl cyclase, the secondary messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP), and protein kinases. In the final step, these protein kinases
phosphorylate proteins in the cytoplasm. This activates proteins in the cell that carry out the changes specified by the hormone.
The phosphorylation of cellular proteins can trigger a wide variety of effects, from nutrient metabolism to the
synthesis of different hormones and other products. The effects vary according to the type of target cell, the G
proteins and kinases involved, and the phosphorylation of proteins. Examples of hormones that use cAMP as a
second messenger include calcitonin, which is important for bone construction and regulating blood calcium levels;
glucagon, which plays a role in blood glucose levels; and thyroid-stimulating hormone, which causes the release of
T3 and T4 from the thyroid gland.
Overall, the phosphorylation cascade significantly increases the efficiency, speed, and specificity of the hormonal
response, as thousands of signaling events can be initiated simultaneously in response to a very low concentration
of hormone in the bloodstream. However, the duration of the hormone signal is short, as cAMP is quickly deactivated
by the enzyme phosphodiesterase (PDE), which is located in the cytosol. The action of PDE helps to ensure that a
target cell’s response ceases quickly unless new hormones arrive at the cell membrane.
Importantly, there are also G proteins that decrease the levels of cAMP in the cell in response to hormone binding.
For example, when growth hormone–inhibiting hormone (GHIH), also known as somatostatin, binds to its receptors
in the pituitary gland, the level of cAMP decreases, thereby inhibiting the secretion of human growth hormone.
Not all water-soluble hormones initiate the cAMP second messenger system. One common alternative system uses
calcium ions as a second messenger. In this system, G proteins activate the enzyme phospholipase C (PLC), which
functions similarly to adenylyl cyclase. Once activated, PLC cleaves a membrane-bound phospholipid into two
molecules: diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). Like cAMP, DAG activates protein kinases that
initiate a phosphorylation cascade. At the same time, IP3 causes calcium ions to be released from storage sites
within the cytosol, such as from within the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. The calcium ions then act as second
messengers in two ways: they can influence enzymatic and other cellular activities directly, or they can bind to
calcium-binding proteins, the most common of which is calmodulin. Upon binding calcium, calmodulin is able to
modulate protein kinase within the cell. Examples of hormones that use calcium ions as a second messenger
system include angiotensin II, which helps regulate blood pressure through vasoconstriction, and growth
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), which causes the pituitary gland to release growth hormones.

Factors Affecting Target Cell Response
You will recall that target cells must have receptors specific to a given hormone if that hormone is to trigger a
response. But several other factors influence the target cell response. For example, the presence of a significant
level of a hormone circulating in the bloodstream can cause its target cells to decrease their number of receptors for
that hormone. This process is called downregulation, and it allows cells to become less reactive to the excessive
hormone levels. When the level of a hormone is chronically reduced, target cells engage in upregulation to increase
their number of receptors. This process allows cells to be more sensitive to the hormone that is present. Cells can
also alter the sensitivity of the receptors themselves to various hormones.
Two or more hormones can interact to affect the response of cells in a variety of ways. The three most common
types of interaction are as follows:
•
The permissive effect, in which the presence of one hormone enables another hormone to act. For example,
thyroid hormones have complex permissive relationships with certain reproductive hormones. A dietary
deficiency of iodine, a component of thyroid hormones, can therefore affect reproductive system development
and functioning.
•
The synergistic effect, in which two hormones with similar effects produce an amplified response. In some
cases, two hormones are required for an adequate response. For example, two different reproductive
hormones—FSH from the pituitary gland and estrogens from the ovaries—are required for the maturation of
female ova (egg cells).
•
The antagonistic effect, in which two hormones have opposing effects. A familiar example is the effect of two
pancreatic hormones, insulin and glucagon. Insulin increases the liver’s storage of glucose as glycogen,
decreasing blood glucose, whereas glucagon stimulates the breakdown of glycogen stores, increasing blood
glucose.
Regulation of Hormone Secretion
To prevent abnormal hormone levels and a potential disease state, hormone levels must be tightly controlled. The
body maintains this control by balancing hormone production and degradation. Feedback loops govern the initiation
and maintenance of most hormone secretion in response to various stimuli.
Role of Feedback Loops
The contribution of feedback loops to homeostasis will only be briefly reviewed here. Positive feedback loops are
characterized by the release of additional hormone in response to an original hormone release. The release of
oxytocin during childbirth is a positive feedback loop. The initial release of oxytocin begins to signal the uterine
muscles to contract, which pushes the fetus toward the cervix, causing it to stretch. This, in turn, signals the
pituitary gland to release more oxytocin, causing labor contractions to intensify. The release of oxytocin decreases
after the birth of the child.
The more common method of hormone regulation is the negative feedback loop. Negative feedback is characterized
by the inhibition of further secretion of a hormone in response to adequate levels of that hormone. This allows blood
levels of the hormone to be regulated within a narrow range. An example of a negative feedback loop is the release
of glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal glands, as directed by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. As
glucocorticoid concentrations in the blood rise, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland reduce their signaling to the
adrenal glands to prevent additional glucocorticoid secretion (Figure 17.6).

FIGURE 17.6
Negative Feedback Loop
The release of adrenal glucocorticoids is stimulated by the release of hormones from the
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. This signaling is inhibited when glucocorticoid levels become elevated by causing negative signals to the
pituitary gland and hypothalamus.
Role of Endocrine Gland Stimuli
Reflexes triggered by both chemical and neural stimuli control endocrine activity. These reflexes may be simple,
involving only one hormone response, or they may be more complex and involve many hormones, as is the case with
the hypothalamic control of various anterior pituitary–controlled hormones.
Humoral stimuli are changes in blood levels of non-hormone chemicals, such as nutrients or ions, which cause the
release or inhibition of a hormone to, in turn, maintain homeostasis. For example, osmoreceptors in the
hypothalamus detect changes in blood osmolarity (the concentration of solutes in the blood plasma). If blood
osmolarity is too high, meaning that the blood is not dilute enough, osmoreceptors signal the hypothalamus to
release ADH. The hormone causes the kidneys to reabsorb more water and reduce the volume of urine produced.
This reabsorption causes a reduction of the osmolarity of the blood, diluting the blood to the appropriate level. The
regulation of blood glucose is another example. High blood glucose levels cause the release of insulin from the
pancreas, which increases glucose uptake by cells and liver storage of glucose as glycogen.
An endocrine gland may also secrete a hormone in response to the presence of another hormone produced by a
different endocrine gland. Such hormonal stimuli often involve the hypothalamus, which produces releasing and
inhibiting hormones that control the secretion of a variety of pituitary hormones.
In addition to these chemical signals, hormones can also be released in response to neural stimuli. A common
example of neural stimuli is the activation of the fight-or-flight response by the sympathetic nervous system. When
an individual perceives danger, sympathetic neurons signal the adrenal glands to secrete norepinephrine and
epinephrine. The two hormones dilate blood vessels, increase the heart and respiratory rate, and suppress the
digestive and immune systems. These responses boost the body’s transport of oxygen to the brain and muscles,
thereby improving the body’s ability to fight or flee.
