7.2 The Skull
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List and identify the bones of the brain case and face
•
Locate the major suture lines of the skull and name the bones associated with each
•
Locate and define the boundaries of the anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae, the temporal fossa, and
infratemporal fossa
•
Define the paranasal sinuses and identify the location of each
•
Name the bones that make up the walls of the orbit and identify the openings associated with the orbit
•
Identify the bones and structures that form the nasal septum and nasal conchae, and locate the hyoid bone
•
Identify the bony openings of the skull
The cranium (skull) is the skeletal structure of the head that supports the face and protects the brain. It is
subdivided into the facial bones and the brain case, or cranial vault (Figure 7.3). The facial bones underlie the facial
structures, form the nasal cavity, enclose the eyeballs, and support the teeth of the upper and lower jaws. The
rounded brain case surrounds and protects the brain and houses the middle and inner ear structures.
In the adult, the skull consists of 22 individual bones, 21 of which are immobile and united into a single unit. The
22nd bone is the mandible (lower jaw), which is the only moveable bone of the skull.
FIGURE 7.3
Parts of the Skull
The skull consists of the rounded brain case that houses the brain and the facial bones that form the
upper and lower jaws, nose, orbits, and other facial structures.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/skull1) to view a rotating and exploded skull, with color-coded bones. Which
bone (yellow) is centrally located and joins with most of the other bones of the skull?
Anterior View of Skull
The anterior skull consists of the facial bones and provides the bony support for the eyes and structures of the face.
This view of the skull is dominated by the openings of the orbits and the nasal cavity. Also seen are the upper and
lower jaws, with their respective teeth (Figure 7.4).
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and muscles that move the eyeball or open the upper eyelid.
The upper margin of the anterior orbit is the supraorbital margin. Located near the midpoint of the supraorbital
margin is a small opening called the supraorbital foramen. This provides for passage of a sensory nerve to the skin
of the forehead. Below the orbit is the infraorbital foramen, which is the point of emergence for a sensory nerve
that supplies the anterior face below the orbit.

FIGURE 7.4
Anterior View of Skull
An anterior view of the skull shows the bones that form the forehead, orbits (eye sockets), nasal
cavity, nasal septum, and upper and lower jaws.
Inside the nasal area of the skull, the nasal cavity is divided into halves by the nasal septum. The upper portion of
the nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone and the lower portion is the vomer
bone. Each side of the nasal cavity is triangular in shape, with a broad inferior space that narrows superiorly. When
looking into the nasal cavity from the front of the skull, two bony plates are seen projecting from each lateral wall.
The larger of these is the inferior nasal concha, an independent bone of the skull. Located just above the inferior
concha is the middle nasal concha, which is part of the ethmoid bone. A third bony plate, also part of the ethmoid
bone, is the superior nasal concha. It is much smaller and out of sight, above the middle concha. The superior nasal
concha is located just lateral to the perpendicular plate, in the upper nasal cavity.
Lateral View of Skull
A view of the lateral skull is dominated by the large, rounded brain case above and the upper and lower jaws with
their teeth below (Figure 7.5). Separating these areas is the bridge of bone called the zygomatic arch. The
zygomatic arch is the bony arch on the side of skull that spans from the area of the cheek to just above the ear
canal. It is formed by the junction of two bony processes: a short anterior component, the temporal process of the
zygomatic bone (the cheekbone) and a longer posterior portion, the zygomatic process of the temporal bone,
extending forward from the temporal bone. Thus the temporal process (anteriorly) and the zygomatic process
(posteriorly) join together, like the two ends of a drawbridge, to form the zygomatic arch. One of the major muscles
that pulls the mandible upward during biting and chewing arises from the zygomatic arch.
On the lateral side of the brain case, above the level of the zygomatic arch, is a shallow space called the temporal
fossa. Below the level of the zygomatic arch and deep to the vertical portion of the mandible is another space called
the infratemporal fossa. Both the temporal fossa and infratemporal fossa contain muscles that act on the mandible
during chewing.

FIGURE 7.5
Lateral View of Skull
The lateral skull shows the large rounded brain case, zygomatic arch, and the upper and lower jaws.
The zygomatic arch is formed jointly by the zygomatic process of the temporal bone and the temporal process of the zygomatic bone. The
shallow space above the zygomatic arch is the temporal fossa. The space inferior to the zygomatic arch and deep to the posterior mandible
is the infratemporal fossa.
Bones of the Brain Case
The brain case contains and protects the brain. The interior space that is almost completely occupied by the brain is
called the cranial cavity. This cavity is bounded superiorly by the rounded top of the skull, which is called the
calvaria (skullcap), and the lateral and posterior sides of the skull. The bones that form the top and sides of the
brain case are usually referred to as the “flat” bones of the skull.
The floor of the brain case is referred to as the base of the skull. This is a complex area that varies in depth and has
numerous openings for the passage of cranial nerves, blood vessels, and the spinal cord. Inside the skull, the base is
subdivided into three large spaces, called the anterior cranial fossa, middle cranial fossa, and posterior cranial
fossa (fossa = “trench or ditch”) (Figure 7.6). From anterior to posterior, the fossae increase in depth. The shape and
depth of each fossa corresponds to the shape and size of the brain region that each houses. The boundaries and
openings of the cranial fossae (singular = fossa) will be described in a later section.

FIGURE 7.6
Cranial Fossae
The bones of the brain case surround and protect the brain, which occupies the cranial cavity. The base of
the brain case, which forms the floor of cranial cavity, is subdivided into the shallow anterior cranial fossa, the middle cranial fossa, and the
deep posterior cranial fossa.
The brain case consists of eight bones. These include the paired parietal and temporal bones, plus the unpaired
frontal, occipital, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones.
Parietal Bone
The parietal bone forms most of the upper lateral side of the skull (see Figure 7.5). These are paired bones, with the
right and left parietal bones joining together at the top of the skull. Each parietal bone is also bounded anteriorly by
the frontal bone, inferiorly by the temporal bone, and posteriorly by the occipital bone.
Temporal Bone
The temporal bone forms the lower lateral side of the skull (see Figure 7.5). Common wisdom has it that the
temporal bone (temporal = “time”) is so named because this area of the head (the temple) is where hair typically
first turns gray, indicating the passage of time.
The temporal bone is subdivided into several regions (Figure 7.7). The flattened, upper portion is the squamous
portion of the temporal bone. Below this area and projecting anteriorly is the zygomatic process of the temporal
bone, which forms the posterior portion of the zygomatic arch. Posteriorly is the mastoid portion of the temporal
bone. Projecting inferiorly from this region is a large prominence, the mastoid process, which serves as a muscle
attachment site. The mastoid process can easily be felt on the side of the head just behind your earlobe. On the
interior of the skull, the petrous portion of each temporal bone forms the prominent, diagonally oriented petrous
ridge in the floor of the cranial cavity. Located inside each petrous ridge are small cavities that house the structures
of the middle and inner ears.

FIGURE 7.7
Temporal Bone
A lateral view of the isolated temporal bone shows the squamous, mastoid, and zygomatic portions of the
temporal bone.
Important landmarks of the temporal bone, as shown in Figure 7.8, include the following:
•
External acoustic meatus (ear canal)—This is the large opening on the lateral side of the skull that is associated
with the ear.
•
Internal acoustic meatus—This opening is located inside the cranial cavity, on the medial side of the petrous
ridge. It connects to the middle and inner ear cavities of the temporal bone.
•
Mandibular fossa—This is the deep, oval-shaped depression located on the external base of the skull, just in
front of the external acoustic meatus. The mandible (lower jaw) joins with the skull at this site as part of the
temporomandibular joint, which allows for movements of the mandible during opening and closing of the
mouth.
•
Articular tubercle—The smooth ridge located immediately anterior to the mandibular fossa. Both the articular
tubercle and mandibular fossa contribute to the temporomandibular joint, the joint that provides for
movements between the temporal bone of the skull and the mandible.
•
Styloid process—Posterior to the mandibular fossa on the external base of the skull is an elongated, downward
bony projection called the styloid process, so named because of its resemblance to a stylus (a pen or writing
tool). This structure serves as an attachment site for several small muscles and for a ligament that supports the
hyoid bone of the neck. (See also Figure 7.7.)
•
Stylomastoid foramen—This small opening is located between the styloid process and mastoid process. This is
the point of exit for the cranial nerve that supplies the facial muscles.
•
Carotid canal—The carotid canal is a zig-zag shaped tunnel that provides passage through the base of the skull
for one of the major arteries that supplies the brain. Its entrance is located on the outside base of the skull,
anteromedial to the styloid process. The canal then runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull, and
then turns upward to its exit in the floor of the middle cranial cavity, above the foramen lacerum.

FIGURE 7.8
External and Internal Views of Base of Skull
(a) The hard palate is formed anteriorly by the palatine processes of the
maxilla bones and posteriorly by the horizontal plate of the palatine bones. (b) The complex floor of the cranial cavity is formed by the
frontal, ethmoid, sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones. The lesser wing of the sphenoid bone separates the anterior and middle cranial
fossae. The petrous ridge (petrous portion of temporal bone) separates the middle and posterior cranial fossae.
Frontal Bone
The frontal bone is the single bone that forms the forehead. At its anterior midline, between the eyebrows, there is
a slight depression called the glabella (see Figure 7.5). The frontal bone also forms the supraorbital margin of the
orbit. Near the middle of this margin, is the supraorbital foramen, the opening that provides passage for a sensory
nerve to the forehead. The frontal bone is thickened just above each supraorbital margin, forming rounded brow
ridges. These are located just behind your eyebrows and vary in size among individuals, although they are generally
larger in males. Inside the cranial cavity, the frontal bone extends posteriorly. This flattened region forms both the
roof of the orbit below and the floor of the anterior cranial cavity above (see Figure 7.8b).
Occipital Bone
The occipital bone is the single bone that forms the posterior skull and posterior base of the cranial cavity (Figure
7.9; see also Figure 7.8). On its outside surface, at the posterior midline, is a small protrusion called the external
occipital protuberance, which serves as an attachment site for a ligament of the posterior neck. Lateral to either
side of this bump is a superior nuchal line (nuchal = “nape” or “posterior neck”). The nuchal lines represent the
most superior point at which muscles of the neck attach to the skull, with only the scalp covering the skull above
these lines. On the base of the skull, the occipital bone contains the large opening of the foramen magnum, which
allows for passage of the spinal cord as it exits the skull. On either side of the foramen magnum is an oval-shaped
occipital condyle. These condyles form joints with the first cervical vertebra and thus support the skull on top of the
vertebral column.
FIGURE 7.9
Posterior View of Skull
This view of the posterior skull shows attachment sites for muscles and joints that support the
skull.
Sphenoid Bone
The sphenoid bone is a single, complex bone of the central skull (Figure 7.10). It serves as a “keystone” bone,
because it joins with almost every other bone of the skull. The sphenoid forms much of the base of the central skull
(see Figure 7.8) and also extends laterally to contribute to the sides of the skull (see Figure 7.5). Inside the cranial
cavity, the right and left lesser wings of the sphenoid bone, which resemble the wings of a flying bird, form the lip
of a prominent ridge that marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae. The sella turcica
(“Turkish saddle”) is located at the midline of the middle cranial fossa. This bony region of the sphenoid bone is
named for its resemblance to the horse saddles used by the Ottoman Turks, with a high back and a tall front. The
rounded depression in the floor of the sella turcica is the hypophyseal (pituitary) fossa, which houses the pea-
sized pituitary (hypophyseal) gland. The greater wings of the sphenoid bone extend laterally to either side away
from the sella turcica, where they form the anterior floor of the middle cranial fossa. The greater wing is best seen
on the outside of the lateral skull, where it forms a rectangular area immediately anterior to the squamous portion of
the temporal bone.
On the inferior aspect of the skull, each half of the sphenoid bone forms two thin, vertically oriented bony plates.
These are the medial pterygoid plate and lateral pterygoid plate (pterygoid = “wing-shaped”). The right and left
medial pterygoid plates form the posterior, lateral walls of the nasal cavity. The somewhat larger lateral pterygoid
plates serve as attachment sites for chewing muscles that fill the infratemporal space and act on the mandible.

FIGURE 7.10
Sphenoid Bone
Shown in isolation in (a) superior and (b) posterior views, the sphenoid bone is a single midline bone that
forms the anterior walls and floor of the middle cranial fossa. It has a pair of lesser wings and a pair of greater wings. The sella turcica
surrounds the hypophyseal fossa. Projecting downward are the medial and lateral pterygoid plates. The sphenoid has multiple openings for
the passage of nerves and blood vessels, including the optic canal, superior orbital fissure, foramen rotundum, foramen ovale, and foramen
spinosum.
Ethmoid Bone
The ethmoid bone is a single, midline bone that forms the roof and lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity, the upper
portion of the nasal septum, and contributes to the medial wall of the orbit (Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12). On the
interior of the skull, the ethmoid also forms a portion of the floor of the anterior cranial cavity (see Figure 7.8b).
Within the nasal cavity, the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone forms the upper portion of the nasal septum.
The ethmoid bone also forms the lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity. Extending from each lateral wall are the
superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha, which are thin, curved projections that extend into the nasal cavity
(Figure 7.13).
In the cranial cavity, the ethmoid bone forms a small area at the midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa.
This region also forms the narrow roof of the underlying nasal cavity. This portion of the ethmoid bone consists of
two parts, the crista galli and cribriform plates. The crista galli (“rooster’s comb or crest”) is a small upward bony
projection located at the midline. It functions as an anterior attachment point for one of the covering layers of the
brain. To either side of the crista galli is the cribriform plate (cribrum = “sieve”), a small, flattened area with
numerous small openings termed olfactory foramina. Small nerve branches from the olfactory areas of the nasal
cavity pass through these openings to enter the brain.
The lateral portions of the ethmoid bone are located between the orbit and upper nasal cavity, and thus form the
lateral nasal cavity wall and a portion of the medial orbit wall. Located inside this portion of the ethmoid bone are
several small, air-filled spaces that are part of the paranasal sinus system of the skull.

FIGURE 7.11
Sagittal Section of Skull
This midline view of the sagittally sectioned skull shows the nasal septum.
FIGURE 7.12
Ethmoid Bone
The unpaired ethmoid bone is located at the midline within the central skull. It has an upward projection,
the crista galli, and a downward projection, the perpendicular plate, which forms the upper nasal septum. The cribriform plates form both
the roof of the nasal cavity and a portion of the anterior cranial fossa floor. The lateral sides of the ethmoid bone form the lateral walls of the
upper nasal cavity, part of the medial orbit wall, and give rise to the superior and middle nasal conchae. The ethmoid bone also contains the
ethmoid air cells.

FIGURE 7.13
Lateral Wall of Nasal Cavity
The three nasal conchae are curved bones that project from the lateral walls of the nasal
cavity. The superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha are parts of the ethmoid bone. The inferior nasal concha is an independent bone
of the skull.
Sutures of the Skull
A suture is an immobile joint between adjacent bones of the skull. The narrow gap between the bones is filled with
dense, fibrous connective tissue that unites the bones. The long sutures located between the bones of the brain
case are not straight, but instead follow irregular, tightly twisting paths. These twisting lines serve to tightly interlock
the adjacent bones, thus adding strength to the skull for brain protection.
The two suture lines seen on the top of the skull are the coronal and sagittal sutures. The coronal suture runs from
side to side across the skull, within the coronal plane of section (see Figure 7.5). It joins the frontal bone to the right
and left parietal bones. The sagittal suture extends posteriorly from the coronal suture, running along the midline at
the top of the skull in the sagittal plane of section (see Figure 7.9). It unites the right and left parietal bones. On the
posterior skull, the sagittal suture terminates by joining the lambdoid suture. The lambdoid suture extends
downward and laterally to either side away from its junction with the sagittal suture. The lambdoid suture joins the
occipital bone to the right and left parietal and temporal bones. This suture is named for its upside-down "V" shape,
which resembles the capital letter version of the Greek letter lambda (Λ). The squamous suture is located on the
lateral skull. It unites the squamous portion of the temporal bone with the parietal bone (see Figure 7.5). At the
intersection of four bones is the pterion, a small, capital-H-shaped suture line region that unites the frontal bone,
parietal bone, squamous portion of the temporal bone, and greater wing of the sphenoid bone. It is the weakest part
of the skull. The pterion is located approximately two finger widths above the zygomatic arch and a thumb’s width
posterior to the upward portion of the zygomatic bone.
Disorders of the...
Skeletal System
Head and traumatic brain injuries are major causes of immediate death and disability, with bleeding and
infections as possible additional complications. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2010), approximately 30 percent of all injury-related deaths in the United States are caused by head injuries.
The majority of head injuries involve falls. They are most common among young children (ages 0–4 years),
adolescents (15–19 years), and the elderly (over 65 years). Additional causes vary, but prominent among these
are automobile and motorcycle accidents.

INTERACTIVE LINK
View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/headblow) to see how a blow to the head may produce a contrecoup
(counterblow) fracture of the basilar portion of the occipital bone on the base of the skull. Why may a basilar
fracture be life threatening?
Facial Bones of the Skull
The facial bones of the skull form the upper and lower jaws, the nose, nasal cavity and nasal septum, and the orbit.
The facial bones include 14 bones, with six paired bones and two unpaired bones. The paired bones are the maxilla,
palatine, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal, and inferior nasal conchae bones. The unpaired bones are the vomer and
mandible bones. Although classified with the brain-case bones, the ethmoid bone also contributes to the nasal
septum and the walls of the nasal cavity and orbit.
Maxillary Bone
The maxillary bone, often referred to simply as the maxilla (plural = maxillae), is one of a pair that together form the
upper jaw, much of the hard palate, the medial floor of the orbit, and the lateral base of the nose (see Figure 7.4).
The curved, inferior margin of the maxillary bone that forms the upper jaw and contains the upper teeth is the
alveolar process of the maxilla (Figure 7.14). Each tooth is anchored into a deep socket called an alveolus. On the
anterior maxilla, just below the orbit, is the infraorbital foramen. This is the point of exit for a sensory nerve that
supplies the nose, upper lip, and anterior cheek. On the inferior skull, the palatine process from each maxillary
bone can be seen joining together at the midline to form the anterior three-quarters of the hard palate (see Figure
7.8a). The hard palate is the bony plate that forms the roof of the mouth and floor of the nasal cavity, separating the
oral and nasal cavities.
Strong blows to the brain-case portion of the skull can produce fractures. These may result in bleeding inside
the skull with subsequent injury to the brain. The most common is a linear skull fracture, in which fracture lines
radiate from the point of impact. Other fracture types include a comminuted fracture, in which the bone is
broken into several pieces at the point of impact, or a depressed fracture, in which the fractured bone is pushed
inward. In a contrecoup (counterblow) fracture, the bone at the point of impact is not broken, but instead a
fracture occurs on the opposite side of the skull. Fractures of the occipital bone at the base of the skull can
occur in this manner, producing a basilar fracture that can damage the artery that passes through the carotid
canal.
A blow to the lateral side of the head may fracture the bones of the pterion. The pterion is an important clinical
landmark because located immediately deep to it on the inside of the skull is a major branch of an artery that
supplies the skull and covering layers of the brain. A strong blow to this region can fracture the bones around the
pterion. If the underlying artery is damaged, bleeding can cause the formation of a hematoma (collection of
blood) between the brain and interior of the skull. As blood accumulates, it will put pressure on the brain.
Symptoms associated with a hematoma may not be apparent immediately following the injury, but if untreated,
blood accumulation will exert increasing pressure on the brain and can result in death within a few hours.

FIGURE 7.14
Maxillary Bone
The maxillary bone forms the upper jaw and supports the upper teeth. Each maxilla also forms the lateral
floor of each orbit and the majority of the hard palate.
Palatine Bone
The palatine bone is one of a pair of irregularly shaped bones that contribute small areas to the lateral walls of the
nasal cavity and the medial wall of each orbit. The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the horizontal plate.
The plates from the right and left palatine bones join together at the midline to form the posterior quarter of the
hard palate (see Figure 7.8a). Thus, the palatine bones are best seen in an inferior view of the skull and hard palate.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
During embryonic development, the right and left maxilla bones come together at the midline to form the upper jaw.
At the same time, the muscle and skin overlying these bones join together to form the upper lip. Inside the mouth,
the palatine processes of the maxilla bones, along with the horizontal plates of the right and left palatine bones, join
together to form the hard palate. If an error occurs in these developmental processes, a birth defect of cleft lip or
cleft palate may result.
Cleft lip is a common development defect that affects approximately 1:1000 births, most of which are male. This
defect involves a partial or complete failure of the right and left portions of the upper lip to fuse together, leaving a
cleft (gap).
A more severe developmental defect is cleft palate, which affects the hard palate. The hard palate is the bony
structure that separates the nasal cavity from the oral cavity. It is formed during embryonic development by the
midline fusion of the horizontal plates from the right and left palatine bones and the palatine processes of the
maxilla bones. Cleft palate affects approximately 1:2500 births and is more common in females. It results from a
failure of the two halves of the hard palate to completely come together and fuse at the midline, thus leaving a gap
between them. This gap allows for communication between the nasal and oral cavities. In severe cases, the bony
gap continues into the anterior upper jaw where the alveolar processes of the maxilla bones also do not properly
join together above the front teeth. If this occurs, a cleft lip will also be seen. Because of the communication
between the oral and nasal cavities, a cleft palate makes it very difficult for an infant to generate the suckling
needed for nursing, thus leaving the infant at risk for malnutrition. Surgical repair is required to correct cleft palate
defects.

Zygomatic Bone
The zygomatic bone is also known as the cheekbone. Each of the paired zygomatic bones forms much of the lateral
wall of the orbit and the lateral-inferior margins of the anterior orbital opening (see Figure 7.4). The short temporal
process of the zygomatic bone projects posteriorly, where it forms the anterior portion of the zygomatic arch (see
Figure 7.5).
Nasal Bone
The nasal bone is one of two small bones that articulate (join) with each other to form the bony base (bridge) of the
nose. They also support the cartilages that form the lateral walls of the nose (see Figure 7.11). These are the bones
that are damaged when the nose is broken.
Lacrimal Bone
Each lacrimal bone is a small, rectangular bone that forms the anterior, medial wall of the orbit (see Figure 7.4 and
Figure 7.5). The anterior portion of the lacrimal bone forms a shallow depression called the lacrimal fossa, and
extending inferiorly from this is the nasolacrimal canal. The lacrimal fluid (tears of the eye), which serves to
maintain the moist surface of the eye, drains at the medial corner of the eye into the nasolacrimal canal. This duct
then extends downward to open into the nasal cavity, behind the inferior nasal concha. In the nasal cavity, the
lacrimal fluid normally drains posteriorly, but with an increased flow of tears due to crying or eye irritation, some
fluid will also drain anteriorly, thus causing a runny nose.

Inferior Nasal Conchae
The right and left inferior nasal conchae form a curved bony plate that projects into the nasal cavity space from the
lower lateral wall (see Figure 7.13). The inferior concha is the largest of the nasal conchae and can easily be seen
when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity.
Vomer Bone
The unpaired vomer bone, often referred to simply as the vomer, is triangular-shaped and forms the posterior-
inferior part of the nasal septum (see Figure 7.11). The vomer is best seen when looking from behind into the
posterior openings of the nasal cavity (see Figure 7.8a). In this view, the vomer is seen to form the entire height of
the nasal septum. A much smaller portion of the vomer can also be seen when looking into the anterior opening of
the nasal cavity.

Mandible
The mandible forms the lower jaw and is the only moveable bone of the skull. At the time of birth, the mandible
consists of paired right and left bones, but these fuse together during the first year to form the single U-shaped
mandible of the adult skull. Each side of the mandible consists of a horizontal body and posteriorly, a vertically
oriented ramus of the mandible (ramus = “branch”). The outside margin of the mandible, where the body and
ramus come together is called the angle of the mandible (Figure 7.15).
The ramus on each side of the mandible has two upward-going bony projections. The more anterior projection is the
flattened coronoid process of the mandible, which provides attachment for one of the biting muscles. The posterior
projection is the condylar process of the mandible, which is topped by the oval-shaped condyle. The condyle of
the mandible articulates (joins) with the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone. Together
these articulations form the temporomandibular joint, which allows for opening and closing of the mouth (see Figure
7.5). The broad U-shaped curve located between the coronoid and condylar processes is the mandibular notch.
Important landmarks for the mandible include the following:
•
Alveolar process of the mandible—This is the upper border of the mandibular body and serves to anchor the
lower teeth.
•
Mental protuberance—The forward projection from the inferior margin of the anterior mandible that forms the
chin (mental = “chin”).
•
Mental foramen—The opening located on each side of the anterior-lateral mandible, which is the exit site for a
sensory nerve that supplies the chin.
•
Mylohyoid line—This bony ridge extends along the inner aspect of the mandibular body (see Figure 7.11). The
muscle that forms the floor of the oral cavity attaches to the mylohyoid lines on both sides of the mandible.
•
Mandibular foramen—This opening is located on the medial side of the ramus of the mandible. The opening
leads into a tunnel that runs down the length of the mandibular body. The sensory nerve and blood vessels that
supply the lower teeth enter the mandibular foramen and then follow this tunnel. Thus, to numb the lower teeth
prior to dental work, the dentist must inject anesthesia into the lateral wall of the oral cavity at a point prior to
where this sensory nerve enters the mandibular foramen.
•
Lingula—This small flap of bone is named for its shape (lingula = “little tongue”). It is located immediately next
to the mandibular foramen, on the medial side of the ramus. A ligament that anchors the mandible during
opening and closing of the mouth extends down from the base of the skull and attaches to the lingula.
FIGURE 7.15
Isolated Mandible
The mandible is the only moveable bone of the skull.

The Orbit
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and contains the muscles that move the eyeball or open the
upper eyelid. Each orbit is cone-shaped, with a narrow posterior region that widens toward the large anterior
opening. To help protect the eye, the bony margins of the anterior opening are thickened and somewhat constricted.
The medial walls of the two orbits are parallel to each other but each lateral wall diverges away from the midline at a
45° angle. This divergence provides greater lateral peripheral vision.
The walls of each orbit include contributions from seven skull bones (Figure 7.16). The frontal bone forms the roof
and the zygomatic bone forms the lateral wall and lateral floor. The medial floor is primarily formed by the maxilla,
with a small contribution from the palatine bone. The ethmoid bone and lacrimal bone make up much of the medial
wall and the sphenoid bone forms the posterior orbit.
At the posterior apex of the orbit is the opening of the optic canal, which allows for passage of the optic nerve from
the retina to the brain. Lateral to this is the elongated and irregularly shaped superior orbital fissure, which provides
passage for the artery that supplies the eyeball, sensory nerves, and the nerves that supply the muscles involved in
eye movements.

FIGURE 7.16
Bones of the Orbit
Seven skull bones contribute to the walls of the orbit. Opening into the posterior orbit from the cranial
cavity are the optic canal and superior orbital fissure.
The Nasal Septum and Nasal Conchae
The nasal septum consists of both bone and cartilage components (Figure 7.17; see also Figure 7.11). The upper
portion of the septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone. The lower and posterior parts of the
septum are formed by the triangular-shaped vomer bone. In an anterior view of the skull, the perpendicular plate of
the ethmoid bone is easily seen inside the nasal opening as the upper nasal septum, but only a small portion of the
vomer is seen as the inferior septum. A better view of the vomer bone is seen when looking into the posterior nasal
cavity with an inferior view of the skull, where the vomer forms the full height of the nasal septum. The anterior
nasal septum is formed by the septal cartilage, a flexible plate that fills in the gap between the perpendicular plate
of the ethmoid and vomer bones. This cartilage also extends outward into the nose where it separates the right and
left nostrils. The septal cartilage is not found in the dry skull.
Attached to the lateral wall on each side of the nasal cavity are the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae
(singular = concha), which are named for their positions (see Figure 7.13). These are bony plates that curve
downward as they project into the space of the nasal cavity. They serve to swirl the incoming air, which helps to
warm and moisturize it before the air moves into the delicate air sacs of the lungs. This also allows mucus, secreted
by the tissue lining the nasal cavity, to trap incoming dust, pollen, bacteria, and viruses. The largest of the conchae is
the inferior nasal concha, which is an independent bone of the skull. The middle concha and the superior conchae,
which is the smallest, are both formed by the ethmoid bone. When looking into the anterior nasal opening of the
skull, only the inferior and middle conchae can be seen. The small superior nasal concha is well hidden above and
behind the middle concha.

FIGURE 7.17
Nasal Septum
The nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone and the vomer bone. The
septal cartilage fills the gap between these bones and extends into the nose.
Cranial Fossae
Inside the skull, the floor of the cranial cavity is subdivided into three cranial fossae (spaces), which increase in
depth from anterior to posterior (see Figure 7.6, Figure 7.8b, and Figure 7.11). Since the brain occupies these areas,
the shape of each conforms to the shape of the brain regions that it contains. Each cranial fossa has anterior and
posterior boundaries and is divided at the midline into right and left areas by a significant bony structure or opening.
Anterior Cranial Fossa
The anterior cranial fossa is the most anterior and the shallowest of the three cranial fossae. It overlies the orbits
and contains the frontal lobes of the brain. Anteriorly, the anterior fossa is bounded by the frontal bone, which also
forms the majority of the floor for this space. The lesser wings of the sphenoid bone form the prominent ledge that
marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae. Located in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa
at the midline is a portion of the ethmoid bone, consisting of the upward projecting crista galli and to either side of
this, the cribriform plates.
Middle Cranial Fossa
The middle cranial fossa is deeper and situated posterior to the anterior fossa. It extends from the lesser wings of
the sphenoid bone anteriorly, to the petrous ridges (petrous portion of the temporal bones) posteriorly. The large,
diagonally positioned petrous ridges give the middle cranial fossa a butterfly shape, making it narrow at the midline
and broad laterally. The temporal lobes of the brain occupy this fossa. The middle cranial fossa is divided at the
midline by the upward bony prominence of the sella turcica, a part of the sphenoid bone. The middle cranial fossa
has several openings for the passage of blood vessels and cranial nerves (see Figure 7.8).
Openings in the middle cranial fossa are as follows:
•
Optic canal—This opening is located at the anterior lateral corner of the sella turcica. It provides for passage of
the optic nerve into the orbit.
•
Superior orbital fissure—This large, irregular opening into the posterior orbit is located on the anterior wall of
the middle cranial fossa, lateral to the optic canal and under the projecting margin of the lesser wing of the
sphenoid bone. Nerves to the eyeball and associated muscles, and sensory nerves to the forehead pass through
this opening.

•
Foramen rotundum—This rounded opening (rotundum = “round”) is located in the floor of the middle cranial
fossa, just inferior to the superior orbital fissure. It is the exit point for a major sensory nerve that supplies the
cheek, nose, and upper teeth.
•
Foramen ovale of the middle cranial fossa—This large, oval-shaped opening in the floor of the middle cranial
fossa provides passage for a major sensory nerve to the lateral head, cheek, chin, and lower teeth.
•
Foramen spinosum—This small opening, located posterior-lateral to the foramen ovale, is the entry point for an
important artery that supplies the covering layers surrounding the brain. The branching pattern of this artery
forms readily visible grooves on the internal surface of the skull and these grooves can be traced back to their
origin at the foramen spinosum.
•
Carotid canal—This is the zig-zag passageway through which a major artery to the brain enters the skull. The
entrance to the carotid canal is located on the inferior aspect of the skull, anteromedial to the styloid process
(see Figure 7.8a). From here, the canal runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull. Just above the
foramen lacerum, the carotid canal opens into the middle cranial cavity, near the posterior-lateral base of the
sella turcica.
•
Foramen lacerum—This irregular opening is located in the base of the skull, immediately inferior to the exit of
the carotid canal. This opening is an artifact of the dry skull, because in life it is completely filled with cartilage.
All the openings of the skull that provide for passage of nerves or blood vessels have smooth margins; the word
lacerum (“ragged” or “torn”) tells us that this opening has ragged edges and thus nothing passes through it.
Posterior Cranial Fossa
The posterior cranial fossa is the most posterior and deepest portion of the cranial cavity. It contains the cerebellum
of the brain. The posterior fossa is bounded anteriorly by the petrous ridges, while the occipital bone forms the floor
and posterior wall. It is divided at the midline by the large foramen magnum (“great aperture”), the opening that
provides for passage of the spinal cord.
Located on the medial wall of the petrous ridge in the posterior cranial fossa is the internal acoustic meatus (see
Figure 7.11). This opening provides for passage of the nerve from the hearing and equilibrium organs of the inner
ear, and the nerve that supplies the muscles of the face. Located at the anterior-lateral margin of the foramen
magnum is the hypoglossal canal. These emerge on the inferior aspect of the skull at the base of the occipital
condyle and provide passage for an important nerve to the tongue.
Immediately inferior to the internal acoustic meatus is the large, irregularly shaped jugular foramen (see Figure
7.8a). Several cranial nerves from the brain exit the skull via this opening. It is also the exit point through the base of
the skull for all the venous return blood leaving the brain. The venous structures that carry blood inside the skull
form large, curved grooves on the inner walls of the posterior cranial fossa, which terminate at each jugular foramen.
Paranasal Sinuses
The paranasal sinuses are hollow, air-filled spaces located within certain bones of the skull (Figure 7.18). All of the
sinuses communicate with the nasal cavity (paranasal = “next to nasal cavity”) and are lined with nasal mucosa.
They serve to reduce bone mass and thus lighten the skull, and they also add resonance to the voice. This second
feature is most obvious when you have a cold or sinus congestion. These produce swelling of the mucosa and
excess mucus production, which can obstruct the narrow passageways between the sinuses and the nasal cavity,
causing your voice to sound different to yourself and others. This blockage can also allow the sinuses to fill with
fluid, with the resulting pressure producing pain and discomfort.
The paranasal sinuses are named for the skull bone that each occupies. The frontal sinus is located just above the
eyebrows, within the frontal bone (see Figure 7.17). This irregular space may be divided at the midline into bilateral
spaces, or these may be fused into a single sinus space. The frontal sinus is the most anterior of the paranasal
sinuses. The largest sinus is the maxillary sinus. These are paired and located within the right and left maxillary
bones, where they occupy the area just below the orbits. The maxillary sinuses are most commonly involved during
sinus infections. Because their connection to the nasal cavity is located high on their medial wall, they are difficult to
drain. The sphenoid sinus is a single, midline sinus. It is located within the body of the sphenoid bone, just anterior
and inferior to the sella turcica, thus making it the most posterior of the paranasal sinuses. The lateral aspects of the
ethmoid bone contain multiple small spaces separated by very thin bony walls. Each of these spaces is called an
ethmoid air cell. These are located on both sides of the ethmoid bone, between the upper nasal cavity and medial
orbit, just behind the superior nasal conchae.
FIGURE 7.18
Paranasal Sinuses
The paranasal sinuses are hollow, air-filled spaces named for the skull bone that each occupies. The
most anterior is the frontal sinus, located in the frontal bone above the eyebrows. The largest are the maxillary sinuses, located in the right
and left maxillary bones below the orbits. The most posterior is the sphenoid sinus, located in the body of the sphenoid bone, under the
sella turcica. The ethmoid air cells are multiple small spaces located in the right and left sides of the ethmoid bone, between the medial
wall of the orbit and lateral wall of the upper nasal cavity.
Hyoid Bone
The hyoid bone is an independent bone that does not contact any other bone and thus is not part of the skull (Figure
7.19). It is a small U-shaped bone located in the upper neck near the level of the inferior mandible, with the tips of
the “U” pointing posteriorly. The hyoid serves as the base for the tongue above, and is attached to the larynx below
and the pharynx posteriorly. The hyoid is held in position by a series of small muscles that attach to it either from
above or below. These muscles act to move the hyoid up/down or forward/back. Movements of the hyoid are
coordinated with movements of the tongue, larynx, and pharynx during swallowing and speaking.

FIGURE 7.19
Hyoid Bone
The hyoid bone is located in the upper neck and does not join with any other bone. It provides attachments
for muscles that act on the tongue, larynx, and pharynx.