26.5 Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the three blood variables considered when making a diagnosis of acidosis or alkalosis
•
Identify the source of compensation for blood pH problems of a respiratory origin
•
Identify the source of compensation for blood pH problems of a metabolic/renal origin
Normal arterial blood pH is restricted to a very narrow range of 7.35 to 7.45. A person who has a blood pH below
7.35 is considered to be in acidosis (actually, “physiological acidosis,” because blood is not truly acidic until its pH
drops below 7), and a continuous blood pH below 7.0 can be fatal. Acidosis has several symptoms, including
headache and confusion, and the individual can become lethargic and easily fatigued (Figure 26.18). A person who
has a blood pH above 7.45 is considered to be in alkalosis, and a pH above 7.8 is fatal. Some symptoms of alkalosis
include cognitive impairment (which can progress to unconsciousness), tingling or numbness in the extremities,
muscle twitching and spasm, and nausea and vomiting. Both acidosis and alkalosis can be caused by either
metabolic or respiratory disorders.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood is dependent on the level of CO2
in the body and the amount of CO2 gas exhaled through the lungs. Thus, the respiratory contribution to acid-base
balance is usually discussed in terms of CO2 (rather than of carbonic acid). Remember that a molecule of carbonic
acid is lost for every molecule of CO2 exhaled, and a molecule of carbonic acid is formed for every molecule of CO2
retained.

FIGURE 26.18
Symptoms of Acidosis and Alkalosis
Symptoms of acidosis affect several organ systems. Both acidosis and alkalosis
can be diagnosed using a blood test.

Metabolic Acidosis: Primary Bicarbonate Deficiency
Metabolic acidosis occurs when the blood is too acidic (pH below 7.35) due to too little bicarbonate, a condition
called primary bicarbonate deficiency. At the normal pH of 7.40, the ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid buffer is
20:1. If a person’s blood pH drops below 7.35, then the person is in metabolic acidosis. The most common cause of
metabolic acidosis is the presence of organic acids or excessive ketone bodies in the blood. Table 26.2 lists some
other causes of metabolic acidosis.

Common Causes of Metabolic Acidosis and Blood Metabolites
Cause
Metabolite
Diarrhea
Bicarbonate
Uremia
Phosphoric, sulfuric, and lactic acids
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Increased ketone bodies
Strenuous exercise
Lactic acid
Methanol
Formic acid*
Paraldehyde
β-Hydroxybutyric acid*
Isopropanol
Propionic acid*
Ethylene glycol
Glycolic acid, and some oxalic and formic acids*
Salicylate/aspirin
Sulfasalicylic acid (SSA)*
TABLE 26.2 *Acid metabolites from ingested chemical.

The first three of the eight causes of metabolic acidosis listed are medical (or unusual physiological) conditions.
Strenuous exercise can cause temporary metabolic acidosis due to the production of lactic acid. The last five causes
result from the ingestion of specific substances. The active form of aspirin is its metabolite, sulfasalicylic acid. An
overdose of aspirin causes acidosis due to the acidity of this metabolite. Metabolic acidosis can also result from
uremia, which is the retention of urea and uric acid. Metabolic acidosis can also arise from diabetic ketoacidosis,
wherein an excess of ketone bodies are present in the blood. Other causes of metabolic acidosis are a decrease in
the excretion of hydrogen ions, which inhibits the conservation of bicarbonate ions, and excessive loss of
bicarbonate ions through the gastrointestinal tract due to diarrhea.

Metabolic Alkalosis: Primary Bicarbonate Excess
Metabolic alkalosis is the opposite of metabolic acidosis. It occurs when the blood is too alkaline (pH above 7.45)
due to too much bicarbonate (called primary bicarbonate excess).
A transient excess of bicarbonate in the blood can follow ingestion of excessive amounts of bicarbonate, citrate, or
antacids for conditions such as stomach acid reflux—known as heartburn. Cushing’s disease, which is the chronic
hypersecretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the anterior pituitary gland, can cause chronic metabolic
alkalosis. The oversecretion of ACTH results in elevated aldosterone levels and an increased loss of potassium by
urinary excretion. Other causes of metabolic alkalosis include the loss of hydrochloric acid from the stomach
through vomiting, potassium depletion due to the use of diuretics for hypertension, and the excessive use of
laxatives.

Respiratory Acidosis: Primary Carbonic Acid/CO2 Excess
Respiratory acidosis occurs when the blood is overly acidic due to an excess of carbonic acid, resulting from too
much CO2 in the blood. Respiratory acidosis can result from anything that interferes with respiration, such as
pneumonia, emphysema, or congestive heart failure.

Respiratory Alkalosis: Primary Carbonic Acid/CO2 Deficiency
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when the blood is overly alkaline due to a deficiency in carbonic acid and CO2 levels in
the blood. This condition usually occurs when too much CO2 is exhaled from the lungs, as occurs in hyperventilation,
which is breathing that is deeper or more frequent than normal. An elevated respiratory rate leading to
hyperventilation can be due to extreme emotional upset or fear, fever, infections, hypoxia, or abnormally high levels
of catecholamines, such as epinephrine and norepinephrine. Surprisingly, aspirin overdose—salicylate toxicity—can
result in respiratory alkalosis as the body tries to compensate for initial acidosis.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/altitude) to see a demonstration of the effect altitude has on blood pH. What
effect does high altitude have on blood pH, and why?

Compensation Mechanisms
Various compensatory mechanisms exist to maintain blood pH within a narrow range, including buffers, respiration,
and renal mechanisms. Although compensatory mechanisms usually work very well, when one of these
mechanisms is not working properly (like kidney failure or respiratory disease), they have their limits. If the pH and
bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio are changed too drastically, the body may not be able to compensate. Moreover,
extreme changes in pH can denature proteins. Extensive damage to proteins in this way can result in disruption of
normal metabolic processes, serious tissue damage, and ultimately death.

Respiratory Compensation
Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis increases the respiratory rate to drive off CO2 and readjust the
bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio to the 20:1 level. This adjustment can occur within minutes. Respiratory
compensation for metabolic alkalosis is not as adept as its compensation for acidosis. The normal response of the
respiratory system to elevated pH is to increase the amount of CO2 in the blood by decreasing the respiratory rate to
conserve CO2. There is a limit to the decrease in respiration, however, that the body can tolerate. Hence, the
respiratory route is less efficient at compensating for metabolic alkalosis than for acidosis.

Metabolic Compensation
Metabolic and renal compensation for respiratory diseases that can create acidosis revolves around the
conservation of bicarbonate ions. In cases of respiratory acidosis, the kidney increases the conservation of
bicarbonate and secretion of H+ through the exchange mechanism discussed earlier. These processes increase the
concentration of bicarbonate in the blood, reestablishing the proper relative concentrations of bicarbonate and
carbonic acid. In cases of respiratory alkalosis, the kidneys decrease the production of bicarbonate and reabsorb H+
from the tubular fluid. These processes can be limited by the exchange of potassium by the renal cells, which use a
K+-H+ exchange mechanism (antiporter).
Diagnosing Acidosis and Alkalosis
Lab tests for pH, CO2 partial pressure (PCO2), and HCO3
– can identify acidosis and alkalosis, indicating whether the
imbalance is respiratory or metabolic, and the extent to which compensatory mechanisms are working. The blood
pH value, as shown in Table 26.3, indicates whether the blood is in acidosis, the normal range, or alkalosis. The
PCO2 and total HCO3
– values aid in determining whether the condition is metabolic or respiratory, and whether the
patient has been able to compensate for the problem. Table 26.3 lists the conditions and laboratory results that can
be used to classify these conditions. Metabolic acid-base imbalances typically result from kidney disease, and the
respiratory system usually responds to compensate.

Types of Acidosis and Alkalosis
pH PCO2 Total HCO3
–
Metabolic acidosis ↓ N, then ↓ ↓
Respiratory acidosis ↓ ↑ N, then ↑
Metabolic alkalosis ↑ N, then↑ ↑
Respiratory alkalosis ↑ ↓ N, then ↓
TABLE 26.3 Reference values (arterial): pH: 7.35–7.45;
pCO2: male: 35–48 mm Hg, female: 32–45 mm Hg; total
venous bicarbonate: 22–29 mM. N denotes normal; ↑
denotes a rising or increased value; and ↓ denotes a
falling or decreased value.

Metabolic acidosis is problematic, as lower-than-normal amounts of bicarbonate are present in the blood. The PCO2
would be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would decrease as the body reestablishes the proper
ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Respiratory acidosis is problematic, as excess CO2 is present in the blood. Bicarbonate levels would be normal at
first, but if compensation has occurred, they would increase in an attempt to reestablish the proper ratio of
bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Alkalosis is characterized by a higher-than-normal pH. Metabolic alkalosis is problematic, as elevated pH and
excess bicarbonate are present. The PCO2 would again be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would
increase as the body attempts to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Respiratory alkalosis is problematic, as CO2 deficiency is present in the bloodstream. The bicarbonate concentration
would be normal at first. When renal compensation occurs, however, the bicarbonate concentration in blood
decreases as the kidneys attempt to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2 by
eliminating more bicarbonate to bring the pH into the physiological range.
