	
	
 
 
 
Anatomy and Physiology 
2e 
 
 
 
 
 
SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS 
J. GORDON BETTS, TYLER JUNIOR COLLEGE 
PETER DESAIX, UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA AT CHAPEL HILL 
EDDIE JOHNSON, CENTRAL OREGON COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
JODY E. JOHNSON, ARAPAHOE COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
OKSANA KOROL, AIMS COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
DEAN KRUSE, PORTLAND COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
BRANDON POE, SPRINGFIELD TECHNICAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
JAMES A. WISE, HAMPTON UNIVERSITY 
MARK WOMBLE, YOUNGSTOWN STATE UNIVERSITY 
KELLY A. YOUNG, CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, LONG BEACH 
 
 
	
	
OpenStax 
Rice University 
6100 Main Street MS-375 
Houston, Texas 77005 
 
To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org. 
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website. 
 
©2022 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook 
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:  
 
- 
If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you 
must retain on every page the following attribution:  
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 
- 
If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the 
following attribution: 
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 
- 
If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including 
but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:  
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 
- 
If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include 
https://openstax.org/details/books/anatomy-and-physiology-2e in your citation. 
 
For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org. 
 
Trademarks 
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo, 
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and 
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express 
written consent of Rice University. 
 
HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13 
978-1-711494-06-7 
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13 
978-1-711494-05-0 
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13 
978-1-951693-42-8 
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR 
2022 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CJP 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
	
 
OPENSTAX 
 
OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced 
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech 
initiative based at Rice University, we’re committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete 
their courses and meet their educational goals. 
 
RICE UNIVERSITY 
 
OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university 
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, 
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by 
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human 
endeavor. 
 
 
 
PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT 
 
OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational 
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of 
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact. 
 
Arnold Ventures 
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative 
Chegg, Inc. 
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation 
Digital Promise 
Ann and John Doerr 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
Girard Foundation 
Google Inc. 
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation 
The Hewlett-Packard Company 
Intel Inc. 
Rusty and John Jaggers 
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation 
Charles Koch Foundation 
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc. 
The Maxfield Foundation 
Burt and Deedee McMurtry 
Michelson 20MM Foundation 
National Science Foundation 
The Open Society Foundations 
Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III 
Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation 
The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund 
Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go 
Stand Together 
Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation 
The Stuart Family Foundation 
Tammy and Guillermo Treviño 
Valhalla Charitable Foundation 
White Star Education Foundation 
Schmidt Futures 
William Marsh Rice University 
Study where you want, what 
you want, when you want. 
Access. The future of education.
openstax.org          
When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.
Our books are free and flexible, forever. 
Get started at openstax.org/details/books/anatomy-and-physiology-2e
Contents
Preface
1
UNIT 1 LEVELS OF ORGANIZATION
CHAPTER 1
An Introduction to the Human Body
7
Introduction
7
1.1 Overview of Anatomy and Physiology
8
1.2 Structural Organization of the Human Body
9
1.3 Functions of Human Life
14
1.4 Requirements for Human Life
16
1.5 Homeostasis
20
1.6 Anatomical Terminology
23
1.7 Medical Imaging
28
Key Terms
32
Chapter Review
33
Interactive Link Questions
34
Review Questions
35
Critical Thinking Questions
36
CHAPTER 2
The Chemical Level of Organization
39
Introduction
39
2.1 Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
40
2.2 Chemical Bonds
47
2.3 Chemical Reactions
51
2.4 Inorganic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
54
2.5 Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
61
Key Terms
75
Chapter Review
76
Interactive Link Questions
78
Review Questions
78
Critical Thinking Questions
80
CHAPTER 3
The Cellular Level of Organization
81
Introduction
81
3.1 The Cell Membrane
82
3.2 The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
91
3.3 The Nucleus and DNA Replication
98
3.4 Protein Synthesis
103
3.5 Cell Growth and Division
107
3.6 Cellular Differentiation
112
Key Terms
116
Chapter Review
118
Interactive Link Questions
120
Review Questions
120
Critical Thinking Questions
122
CHAPTER 4
The Tissue Level of Organization
125
Introduction
125
4.1 Types of Tissues
126
4.2 Epithelial Tissue
130
4.3 Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
140
4.4 Muscle Tissue and Motion
147
4.5 Nervous Tissue Mediates Perception and Response
149
4.6 Tissue Injury and Aging
151
Key Terms
155
Chapter Review
157
Interactive Link Questions
159
Review Questions
159
Critical Thinking Questions
160
UNIT 2 SUPPORT AND MOVEMENT
CHAPTER 5
The Integumentary System
163
Introduction
163
5.1 Layers of the Skin
163
5.2 Accessory Structures of the Skin
172
5.3 Functions of the Integumentary System
177
5.4 Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
180
Key Terms
186
Chapter Review
187
Interactive Link Questions
188
Review Questions
188
Critical Thinking Questions
190
CHAPTER 6
Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
191
Introduction
191
6.1 The Functions of the Skeletal System
191
6.2 Bone Classification
194
6.3 Bone Structure
196
6.4 Bone Formation and Development
206
6.5 Fractures: Bone Repair
212
6.6 Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone Tissue
215
6.7 Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of the Skeletal System and Other Organ Systems
219
Key Terms
221
Chapter Review
222
Review Questions
223
Critical Thinking Questions
226
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 7
Axial Skeleton
227
Introduction
227
7.1 Divisions of the Skeletal System
228
7.2 The Skull
229
7.3 The Vertebral Column
248
7.4 The Thoracic Cage
259
7.5 Embryonic Development of the Axial Skeleton
260
Key Terms
263
Chapter Review
267
Interactive Link Questions
270
Review Questions
270
Critical Thinking Questions
271
CHAPTER 8
The Appendicular Skeleton
273
Introduction
273
8.1 The Pectoral Girdle
273
8.2 Bones of the Upper Limb
277
8.3 The Pelvic Girdle and Pelvis
285
8.4 Bones of the Lower Limb
289
8.5 Development of the Appendicular Skeleton
297
Key Terms
301
Chapter Review
306
Interactive Link Questions
309
Review Questions
309
Critical Thinking Questions
311
CHAPTER 9
Joints
313
Introduction
313
9.1 Classification of Joints
314
9.2 Fibrous Joints
316
9.3 Cartilaginous Joints
319
9.4 Synovial Joints
320
9.5 Types of Body Movements
327
9.6 Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
332
9.7 Development of Joints
344
Key Terms
346
Chapter Review
349
Interactive Link Questions
352
Review Questions
354
Critical Thinking Questions
356
CHAPTER 10
Muscle Tissue
357
Introduction
357
10.1 Overview of Muscle Tissues
357
10.2 Skeletal Muscle
359
10.3 Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
364
10.4 Nervous System Control of Muscle Tension
372
10.5 Types of Muscle Fibers
377
10.6 Exercise and Muscle Performance
378
10.7 Cardiac Muscle Tissue
381
10.8 Smooth Muscle
383
10.9 Development and Regeneration of Muscle Tissue
386
Key Terms
388
Chapter Review
389
Interactive Link Questions
391
Review Questions
392
Critical Thinking Questions
394
CHAPTER 11
The Muscular System
395
Introduction
395
11.1 Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their Lever Systems
395
11.2 Naming Skeletal Muscles
400
11.3 Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
403
11.4 Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
414
11.5 Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
421
11.6 Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
432
Key Terms
441
Chapter Review
445
Review Questions
447
Critical Thinking Questions
449
UNIT 3 REGULATION, INTEGRATION, AND
CONTROL
CHAPTER 12
The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
451
Introduction
451
12.1 Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
452
12.2 Nervous Tissue
458
12.3 The Function of Nervous Tissue
465
12.4 The Action Potential
468
12.5 Communication Between Neurons
476
Key Terms
483
Chapter Review
486
Interactive Link Questions
488
Review Questions
489
Critical Thinking Questions
490
CHAPTER 13
Anatomy of the Nervous System
493
Introduction
493
13.1 The Embryologic Perspective
494
13.2 The Central Nervous System
499
Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 Circulation and the Central Nervous System
511
13.4 The Peripheral Nervous System
518
Key Terms
528
Chapter Review
532
Interactive Link Questions
534
Review Questions
535
Critical Thinking Questions
537
CHAPTER 14
The Somatic Nervous System
539
Introduction
539
14.1 Sensory Perception
540
14.2 Central Processing
559
14.3 Motor Responses
571
Key Terms
579
Chapter Review
583
Interactive Link Questions
585
Review Questions
586
Critical Thinking Questions
587
CHAPTER 15
The Autonomic Nervous System
589
Introduction
589
15.1 Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
590
15.2 Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
599
15.3 Central Control
607
15.4 Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
610
Key Terms
616
Chapter Review
618
Interactive Link Questions
620
Review Questions
621
Critical Thinking Questions
622
CHAPTER 16
The Neurological Exam
625
Introduction
625
16.1 Overview of the Neurological Exam
626
16.2 The Mental Status Exam
629
16.3 The Cranial Nerve Exam
635
16.4 The Sensory and Motor Exams
644
16.5 The Coordination and Gait Exams
649
Key Terms
653
Chapter Review
655
Interactive Link Questions
657
Review Questions
658
Critical Thinking Questions
660
CHAPTER 17
The Endocrine System
661
Introduction
661
17.1 An Overview of the Endocrine System
661
17.2 Hormones
664
17.3 The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
673
17.4 The Thyroid Gland
680
17.5 The Parathyroid Glands
685
17.6 The Adrenal Glands
688
17.7 The Pineal Gland
691
17.8 Gonadal and Placental Hormones
692
17.9 The Endocrine Pancreas
693
17.10 Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
697
17.11 Development and Aging of the Endocrine System
700
Key Terms
702
Chapter Review
704
Interactive Link Questions
706
Review Questions
707
Critical Thinking Questions
709
UNIT 4 FLUIDS AND TRANSPORT
CHAPTER 18
The Cardiovascular System: Blood
711
Introduction
711
18.1 An Overview of Blood
711
18.2 Production of the Formed Elements
716
18.3 Erythrocytes
719
18.4 Leukocytes and Platelets
727
18.5 Hemostasis
733
18.6 Blood Typing
739
Key Terms
744
Chapter Review
746
Interactive Link Questions
748
Review Questions
748
Critical Thinking Questions
750
CHAPTER 19
The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
751
Introduction
751
19.1 Heart Anatomy
752
19.2 Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
772
19.3 Cardiac Cycle
784
19.4 Cardiac Physiology
788
19.5 Development of the Heart
799
Key Terms
801
Chapter Review
805
Interactive Link Questions
806
Review Questions
806
Access for free at openstax.org
Critical Thinking Questions
808
CHAPTER 20
The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
809
Introduction
809
20.1 Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
810
20.2 Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
821
20.3 Capillary Exchange
830
20.4 Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
832
20.5 Circulatory Pathways
842
20.6 Development of Blood Vessels and Fetal Circulation
878
Key Terms
881
Chapter Review
887
Interactive Link Questions
889
Review Questions
889
Critical Thinking Questions
891
CHAPTER 21
The Lymphatic and Immune System
893
Introduction
893
21.1 Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
894
21.2 Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
905
21.3 The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
912
21.4 The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
920
21.5 The Immune Response against Pathogens
926
21.6 Diseases Associated with Depressed or Overactive Immune Responses
930
21.7 Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
934
Key Terms
940
Chapter Review
942
Interactive Link Questions
943
Review Questions
944
Critical Thinking Questions
946
UNIT 5 ENERGY, MAINTENANCE, AND
ENVIRONMENTAL EXCHANGE
CHAPTER 22
The Respiratory System
947
Introduction
947
22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
948
22.2 The Lungs
959
22.3 The Process of Breathing
961
22.4 Gas Exchange
970
22.5 Transport of Gases
975
22.6 Modifications in Respiratory Functions
981
22.7 Embryonic Development of the Respiratory System
983
Key Terms
986
Chapter Review
988
Interactive Link Questions
991
Review Questions
992
Critical Thinking Questions
994
CHAPTER 23
The Digestive System
995
Introduction
995
23.1 Overview of the Digestive System
995
23.2 Digestive System Processes and Regulation
1001
23.3 The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1005
23.4 The Stomach
1016
23.5 The Small and Large Intestines
1022
23.6 Accessory Organs in Digestion: The Liver, Pancreas, and Gallbladder
1032
23.7 Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1037
Key Terms
1048
Chapter Review
1051
Interactive Link Questions
1052
Review Questions
1053
Critical Thinking Questions
1055
CHAPTER 24
Metabolism and Nutrition
1057
Introduction
1057
24.1 Overview of Metabolic Reactions
1058
24.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
1063
24.3 Lipid Metabolism
1075
24.4 Protein Metabolism
1081
24.5 Metabolic States of the Body
1087
24.6 Energy and Heat Balance
1091
24.7 Nutrition and Diet
1093
Key Terms
1101
Chapter Review
1102
Review Questions
1104
Critical Thinking Questions
1106
CHAPTER 25
The Urinary System
1109
Introduction
1109
25.1 Physical Characteristics of Urine
1110
25.2 Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
1113
25.3 Gross Anatomy of the Kidney
1117
25.4 Microscopic Anatomy of the Kidney
1121
25.5 Physiology of Urine Formation
1125
25.6 Tubular Reabsorption
1128
25.7 Regulation of Renal Blood Flow
1137
25.8 Endocrine Regulation of Kidney Function
1139
25.9 Regulation of Fluid Volume and Composition
1141
25.10 The Urinary System and Homeostasis
1143
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
1147
Chapter Review
1149
Review Questions
1151
Critical Thinking Questions
1153
CHAPTER 26
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
1155
Introduction
1155
26.1 Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
1155
26.2 Water Balance
1163
26.3 Electrolyte Balance
1166
26.4 Acid-Base Balance
1171
26.5 Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
1176
Key Terms
1180
Chapter Review
1180
Interactive Link Questions
1181
Review Questions
1181
Critical Thinking Questions
1183
UNIT 6 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND THE
CONTINUITY OF LIFE
CHAPTER 27
The Reproductive System
1185
Introduction
1185
27.1 Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1186
27.2 Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1196
27.3 Development of the Male and Female Reproductive Systems
1212
Key Terms
1216
Chapter Review
1218
Interactive Link Questions
1219
Review Questions
1219
Critical Thinking Questions
1220
CHAPTER 28
Development and Inheritance
1223
Introduction
1223
28.1 Fertilization
1223
28.2 Embryonic Development
1228
28.3 Fetal Development
1239
28.4 Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
1243
28.5 Adjustments of the Infant at Birth and Postnatal Stages
1250
28.6 Lactation
1252
28.7 Patterns of Inheritance
1256
Key Terms
1266
Chapter Review
1268
Interactive Link Questions
1270
Review Questions
1270
Critical Thinking Questions
1272
References
1275
Index
1279
Access for free at openstax.org
PREFACE
About OpenStax
OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to transform learning so that
education works for every student. Through our
partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our
alliance with other educational resource companies,
we're breaking down the most common barriers to
learning. Because we believe that everyone should and
can have access to knowledge.
About OpenStax Resources
Customization
Anatomy and Physiology 2e is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC
BY) license, which means that you can distribute,
remix, and build upon the content, as long as you
provide attribution to OpenStax and its content
contributors.
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to
use the entire book or select the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix
the content by assigning your students certain chapters
and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you
prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your
syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.
Instructors also have the option of creating a
customized version of their OpenStax book. The
custom version can be made available to students in
low-cost print or digital form through their campus
bookstore. Visit your book page on OpenStax.org for
more information.
Errata
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review
process. However, like any professional-grade
textbook, errors sometimes occur. Since our books are
web based, we can make updates periodically when
deemed pedagogically necessary. If you have a
correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your
book page on OpenStax.org. Subject matter experts
review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed
to remaining transparent about all updates, so you will
also find a list of past errata changes on your book
page on OpenStax.org.
Format
You can access this textbook for free in web view or
PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low-cost in print.
About Anatomy and Physiology 2e
Coverage and Scope
The units of Anatomy and Physiology 2e adhere to the
scope and sequence followed by most two-semester
courses. The development choices for this textbook
were guided by hundreds of faculty who are deeply
involved in teaching this course, as well as instructional
designers, academic success experts, and educational
researchers who have supported A&P educators and
students. These choices led to innovations in art,
terminology, career orientation, practical applications,
and multimedia-based learning, all with a goal of
increasing relevance to students. We strove to make
the discipline engaging and relevant to students, so
that they can draw from it a working knowledge that
will enrich their future studies and support them in
their careers.
Unit 1: Levels of Organization
Chapters 1–4 provide students with a basic
understanding of human anatomy and physiology,
including its language, the levels of organization, and
the basics of chemistry and cell biology. These
chapters provide a foundation for the further study of
the body. They also focus particularly on how the
body’s regions, important chemicals, and cells
maintain homeostasis.
Chapter 1 An Introduction to the Human Body
Chapter 2 The Chemical Level of Organization
Chapter 3 The Cellular Level of Organization
Chapter 4 The Tissue Level of Organization
Unit 2: Support and Movement
In Chapters 5–11, students explore the skin, the
largest organ of the body, and examine the body’s
skeletal and muscular systems, following a traditional
sequence of topics. This unit is the first to walk
students through specific systems of the body, and as it
does so, it maintains a focus on homeostasis as well as
those diseases and conditions that can disrupt it.
Chapter 5 The Integumentary System
Chapter 6 Bone and Skeletal Tissue
Chapter 7 The Axial Skeleton
Chapter 8 The Appendicular Skeleton
Chapter 9 Joints
Chapter 10 Muscle Tissue
Chapter 11 The Muscular System
Unit 3: Regulation, Integration, and Control
Chapters 12–17 help students answer questions about
Preface
1
nervous and endocrine system control and regulation.
In a break with the traditional sequence of topics, the
special senses are integrated into the chapter on the
somatic nervous system. The chapter on the
neurological examination offers students a unique
approach to understanding nervous system function
using five simple but powerful diagnostic tests.
Chapter 12 Introduction to the Nervous System
Chapter 13 The Anatomy of the Nervous System
Chapter 14 The Somatic Nervous System
Chapter 15 The Autonomic Nervous System
Chapter 16 The Neurological Exam
Chapter 17 The Endocrine System
Unit 4: Fluids and Transport
In Chapters 18–21, students examine the principal
means of transport for materials needed to support the
human body, regulate its internal environment, and
provide protection.
Chapter 18 Blood
Chapter 19 The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Chapter 20 The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels
and Circulation
Chapter 21 The Lymphatic System and Immunity
Unit 5: Energy, Maintenance, and Environmental
Exchange
In Chapters 22–26, students discover the interaction
between body systems and the outside environment
for the exchange of materials, the capture of energy,
the release of waste, and the overall maintenance of
the internal systems that regulate the exchange. The
explanations and illustrations are particularly focused
on how structure relates to function.
Chapter 22 The Respiratory System
Chapter 23 The Digestive System
Chapter 24 Nutrition and Metabolism
Chapter 25 The Urinary System
Chapter 26 Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Balance
Unit 6: Human Development and the Continuity of
Life
The closing chapters examine the male and female
reproductive systems, describe the process of human
development and the different stages of pregnancy,
and end with a review of the mechanisms of
inheritance.
Chapter 27 The Reproductive System
Chapter 28 Development and Genetic Inheritance
Changes to the Second Edition
The Anatomy and Physiology 2e revision focuses on
inclusive and equitable instruction, scientific accuracy,
and enhanced instructor and student support. The
improvements have been informed by extensive
feedback from adopting faculty, curricular innovators,
and equity experts.
The revision includes the following core changes:
•
In explanations of endocrine function,
reproduction, development, inheritance, and
related topics, the second edition is clearer and
more accurate in differentiations related to sex,
and eliminates incorrect equivalencies and
generalizations regarding sex and gender.
OpenStax thanks Sam Long and River Suh,
founders of Gender-Inclusive Biology, for their
extensive guidance and support
•
Many of the illustrations have been improved to be
more representative of diverse populations. We
have also added photos of many conditions,
symptoms, and disorders that present differently
depending on skin tone. (Note that many of the
illustration changes were made prior to the second
edition revision.)
•
In discussions and illustrations of genetics and
inheritance, the text is clearer in its terminology
and explanations related to parenting and parental
roles.
•
Several research references, data, and
terminology have been improved to improve
representation and currency.
These improvements are designed to create welcoming
and inclusive learning experiences and promote
scientifically accurate practices that students will
encounter in their studies and careers. The additions
and changes were made in a manner designed to
enrich and support all users while maintaining the
general approach of the text. Because OpenStax and
our authors are aware of the difficulties posed by
reorganization and renumbering, the extensive text and
illustration changes have been implemented within the
existing structure and organization of the book. A
detailed transition guide will be available within the
book’s Instructor Resources at OpenStax.org.
Pedagogical Foundation and Features
Anatomy and Physiology 2e is designed to promote
scientific literacy. Throughout the text, you will find
features that engage the students by taking selected
topics a step further.
•
Homeostatic Imbalances discusses the effects
and results of imbalances in the body.
•
Disorders showcases a disorder that is relevant to
the body system at hand. This feature may focus
on a specific disorder or a set of related disorders.
•
Diseases showcases a disease that is relevant to
the body system at hand.
2
Preface
Access for free at openstax.org
•
Aging explores the effect aging has on a body’s
system and specific disorders that manifest over
time.
•
Career Connections presents information on the
various careers often pursued by allied health
students, such as medical technician, medical
examiner, and neurophysiologist. Students are
introduced to the educational requirements for
and day-to-day responsibilities in these careers.
•
Everyday Connections tie anatomical and
physiological concepts to emerging issues and
discuss these in terms of everyday life. Topics
include “Anabolic Steroids” and “The Effect of
Second-Hand Tobacco Smoke.”
•
Interactive Links direct students to online
exercises, simulations, animations, and videos to
add a fuller context to core content and help
improve understanding of the material. Many
features include links to the University of
Michigan’s interactive WebScopes, which allow
students to zoom in on micrographs in the
collection. These resources were vetted by
reviewers and other subject matter experts to
ensure that they are effective and accurate. We
strongly urge students to explore these links,
whether viewing a video or inputting data into a
simulation, to gain the fullest experience and to
learn how to search for information independently.
Dynamic, Learner-Centered Art
Our unique approach to visuals is designed to
emphasize only the components most important in any
given illustration. The art style is particularly aimed at
focusing student learning through a powerful blend of
traditional depictions and instructional innovations.
Much of the art in this book consists of black line
illustrations. The strongest line is used to highlight the
most important structures, and shading is used to
show dimension and shape. Color is used sparingly to
highlight and clarify the primary anatomical or
functional point of the illustration. This technique is
intended to draw students’ attention to the critical
learning point in the illustration, without distraction
from excessive gradients, shadows, and highlights. Full
color is used when the structure or process requires it
(for example, muscle diagrams and cardiovascular
system illustrations).
By highlighting the most important portions of the
illustration, the artwork helps students focus on the
most important points without overwhelming them.
Micrographs
Micrograph magnifications have been calculated based
on the objective provided with the image. If a
micrograph was recorded at 40×, and the image was
magnified an additional 2×, we calculated the final
magnification of the micrograph to be 80×.
Please note that, when viewing the textbook
electronically, the micrograph magnification provided
in the text does not take into account the size and
magnification of the screen on your electronic device.
There may be some variation.
These glands secrete oils that lubricate and protect the
skin. LM × 400. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Preface
3
Additional Resources
Student and Instructor Resources
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students
and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an
instructor solution guide, a curated video guide, and
several types of PowerPoint slides and image
resources. Instructor resources require a verified
instructor account, which you can apply for when you
log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Student
resources include guided lecture notes, a student
solutions manual, and a pronunciation guide.
Community Hubs
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of
Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons—a platform for
instructors to share community-created resources that
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our
Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
materials or download resources to use in their own
courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We
encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
most relevant to your teaching and research as an
opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage
with other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit
www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.
Technology Partners
As allies in making high-quality learning materials
accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-
cost tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To
access the technology options for your text, visit your
book page on OpenStax.org.
About the Authors
Senior Contributing Authors
J. Gordon Betts, Tyler Junior College
Peter Desaix, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Eddie Johnson, Central Oregon Community College
Jody E. Johnson, Arapahoe Community College
Oksana Korol, Aims Community College
Dean Kruse, Portland Community College
Brandon Poe, Springfield Technical Community College
James A. Wise, Hampton University
Mark Womble, Youngstown State University
Kelly A. Young, California State University, Long Beach
Advisor
Robin J. Heyden
Contributing Authors
Kim Aaronson, Aquarius Institute; Triton College
Lopamudra Agarwal, Augusta Technical College
Gary Allen, Dalhousie University
Robert Allison, McLennan Community College
Heather Armbruster, Southern Union State Community
College
Timothy Ballard, University of North Carolina
Wilmington
Matthew Barlow, Eastern New Mexico University
William Blaker, Furman University
Julie Bowers, East Tennessee State University
Emily Bradshaw, Florida Southern College
Nishi Bryska, University of North Carolina, Charlotte
Susan Caley Opsal, Illinois Valley Community College
Boyd Campbell, Southwest College of Naturopathic
Medicine and Health Sciences
Ann Caplea, Walsh University
Marnie Chapman, University of Alaska, Sitka
Barbara Christie-Pope, Cornell College
Kenneth Crane, Texarkana College
Maurice Culver, Florida State College at Jacksonville
Heather Cushman, Tacoma Community College
Noelle Cutter, Molloy College
Lynnette Danzl-Tauer, Rock Valley College
Jane Davis, Aurora University
AnnMarie DelliPizzi, Dominican College
Susan Dentel, Washtenaw Community College
Pamela Dobbins, Shelton State Community College
Patty Dolan, Pacific Lutheran University
Sondra Dubowsky, McLennan Community College
Peter Dukehart, Three Rivers Community College
Ellen DuPré, Central College
Elizabeth DuPriest, Warner Pacific College
Pam Elf, University of Minnesota
Sharon Ellerton, Queensborough Community College
Carla Endres, Utah State University - College of Eastern
Utah: San Juan Campus
Myriam Feldman, Lake Washington Institute of
Technology; Cascadia Community College
Greg Fitch, Avila University
Lynn Gargan, Tarant County College
Michael Giangrande, Oakland Community College
Chaya Gopalan, St. Louis College of Pharmacy
Victor Greco, Chattahoochee Technical College
Susanna Heinze, Skagit Valley College
Ann Henninger, Wartburg College
Dale Horeth, Tidewater Community College
Michael Hortsch, University of Michigan
Rosemary Hubbard, Marymount University
Mark Hubley, Prince George's Community College
Branko Jablanovic, College of Lake County
Norman Johnson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
Mark Jonasson, North Arkansas College
Jeff Keyte, College of Saint Mary
William Kleinelp, Middlesex County College
4
Preface
Access for free at openstax.org
Leigh Kleinert, Grand Rapids Community College
Brenda Leady, University of Toledo
John Lepri, University of North Carolina, Greensboro
Sarah Leupen, University of Maryland, Baltimore
County
Lihua Liang, Johns Hopkins University
Robert Mallet, University of North Texas Health Science
Center
Bruce Maring, Daytona State College
Elisabeth Martin, College of Lake County
Natalie Maxwell, Carl Albert State College, Sallisaw
Julie May, William Carey University
Debra McLaughlin, University of Maryland University
College
Nicholas Mitchell, St. Bonaventure University
Shobhana Natarajan, Brookhaven College
Phillip Nicotera, St. Petersburg College
Mary Jane Niles, University of San Francisco
Ikemefuna Nwosu, Parkland College; Lake Land
College
Betsy Ott, Tyler Junior College
Ivan Paul, John Wood Community College
Aaron Payette, College of Southern Nevada
Scott Payne, Kentucky Wesleyan College
Cameron Perkins, South Georgia College
David Pfeiffer, University of Alaska, Anchorage
Thomas Pilat, Illinois Central College
Eileen Preston, Tarrant County College
Mike Pyle, Olivet Nazarene University
Robert Rawding, Gannon University
Jason Schreer, State University of New York at
Potsdam
Laird Sheldahl, Mt. Hood Community College
Brian Shmaefsky, Lone Star College System
Douglas Sizemore, Bevill State Community College
Susan Spencer, Mount Hood Community College
Cynthia Standley, University of Arizona
Robert Sullivan, Marist College
Eric Sun, Middle Georgia State College
Tom Swenson, Ithaca College
Kathleen Tallman, Azusa Pacific University
Rohinton Tarapore, University of Pennsylvania
Elizabeth Tattersall, Western Nevada College
Mark Thomas, University of Northern Colorado
Janis Thompson, Lorain County Community College
Rita Thrasher, Pensacola State College
David Van Wylen, St. Olaf College
Lynn Wandrey, Mott Community College
Margaret Weck, St. Louis College of Pharmacy
Kathleen Weiss, George Fox University
Neil Westergaard, Williston State College
David Wortham, West Georgia Technical College
Umesh Yadav, University of Texas Medical Branch
Tony Yates, Oklahoma Baptist University
Justin York, Glendale Community College
Cheri Zao, North Idaho College
Elena Zoubina, Bridgewater State University; Massasoit
Community College
Shobhana Natarajan, Alcon Laboratories, Inc.
Special Thanks
OpenStax wishes to thank the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School for the use of their extensive
micrograph collection. Many of the UM micrographs
that appear in Anatomy and Physiology 2e are
interactive WebScopes, which students can explore by
zooming in and out.
Preface
5
6
Preface
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1
An Introduction to the Human Body
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish between anatomy and physiology, and identify several branches of each
•
Describe the structure of the body, from simplest to most complex, in terms of the six levels of organization
•
Identify the functional characteristics of human life
•
Identify the four requirements for human survival
•
Define homeostasis and explain its importance to normal human functioning
•
Use appropriate anatomical terminology to identify key body structures, body regions, and directions in the
body
•
Compare and contrast at least four medical imaging techniques in terms of their function and use in
medicine
Though you may approach a course in anatomy and physiology strictly as a requirement for your
field of study, the knowledge you gain in this course will serve you well in many aspects of your life. An
understanding of anatomy and physiology is not only fundamental to any career in the health professions, but it can
also benefit your own health. Familiarity with the human body can help you make healthful choices and prompt you
to take appropriate action when signs of illness arise. Your knowledge in this field will help you understand news
about nutrition, medications, medical devices, and procedures and help you understand genetic or infectious
diseases. At some point, everyone will have a problem with some aspect of their body and your knowledge can help
you to be a better parent, spouse, partner, friend, colleague, or caregiver.
This chapter begins with an overview of anatomy and physiology and a preview of the body regions and functions. It
then covers the characteristics of life and how the body works to maintain stable conditions. It introduces a set of
standard terms for body structures and for planes and positions in the body that will serve as a foundation for more
comprehensive information covered later in the text. It ends with examples of medical imaging used to see inside
the living body.
Figure 1.1
Blood Pressure A proficiency in anatomy and physiology is fundamental to any career in the health professions. (credit: Bryan
Mason/flickr)
1.1 Overview of Anatomy and Physiology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast anatomy and physiology, including their specializations and methods of study
•
Discuss the fundamental relationship between anatomy and physiology
Human anatomy is the scientific study of the body’s structures. Some of these structures are very small and can
only be observed and analyzed with the assistance of a microscope. Other larger structures can readily be seen,
manipulated, measured, and weighed. The word “anatomy” comes from a Greek root that means “to cut apart.”
Human anatomy was first studied by observing the exterior of the body and observing the wounds of soldiers and
other injuries. Later, physicians were allowed to dissect bodies of the dead to augment their knowledge. When a
body is dissected, its structures are cut apart in order to observe their physical attributes and their relationships to
one another. Dissection is still used in medical schools, anatomy courses, and in pathology labs. In order to observe
structures in living people, however, a number of imaging techniques have been developed. These techniques allow
clinicians to visualize structures inside the living body such as a cancerous tumor or a fractured bone.
Like most scientific disciplines, anatomy has areas of specialization. Gross anatomy is the study of the larger
structures of the body, those visible without the aid of magnification (Figure 1.2 a). Macro- means “large,” thus,
gross anatomy is also referred to as macroscopic anatomy. In contrast, micro- means “small,” and microscopic
anatomy is the study of structures that can be observed only with the use of a microscope or other magnification
devices (Figure 1.2 b). Microscopic anatomy includes cytology, the study of cells and histology, the study of tissues.
As the technology of microscopes has advanced, anatomists have been able to observe smaller and smaller
structures of the body, from slices of large structures like the heart, to the three-dimensional structures of large
molecules in the body.
FIGURE 1.2
Gross and Microscopic Anatomy
(a) Gross anatomy considers large structures such as the brain. (b) Microscopic anatomy
can deal with the same structures, though at a different scale. This is a micrograph of nerve cells from the brain. LM × 1600. (credit a:
“WriterHound”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Anatomists take two general approaches to the study of the body’s structures: regional and systemic. Regional
anatomy is the study of the interrelationships of all of the structures in a specific body region, such as the abdomen.
Studying regional anatomy helps us appreciate the interrelationships of body structures, such as how muscles,
nerves, blood vessels, and other structures work together to serve a particular body region. In contrast, systemic
anatomy is the study of the structures that make up a discrete body system—that is, a group of structures that work
together to perform a unique body function. For example, a systemic anatomical study of the muscular system
would consider all of the skeletal muscles of the body.
Whereas anatomy is about structure, physiology is about function. Human physiology is the scientific study of the
chemistry and physics of the structures of the body and the ways in which they work together to support the
functions of life. Much of the study of physiology centers on the body’s tendency toward homeostasis. Homeostasis
is the state of steady internal conditions maintained by living things. The study of physiology certainly includes
observation, both with the naked eye and with microscopes, as well as manipulations and measurements. However,
current advances in physiology usually depend on carefully designed laboratory experiments that reveal the
8
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
functions of the many structures and chemical compounds that make up the human body.
Like anatomists, physiologists typically specialize in a particular branch of physiology. For example, neurophysiology
is the study of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves and how these work together to perform functions as complex and
diverse as vision, movement, and thinking. Physiologists may work from the organ level (exploring, for example,
what different parts of the brain do) to the molecular level (such as exploring how an electrochemical signal travels
along nerves).
Form is closely related to function in all living things. For example, the thin flap of your eyelid can snap down to clear
away dust particles and almost instantaneously slide back up to allow you to see again. At the microscopic level, the
arrangement and function of the nerves and muscles that serve the eyelid allow for its quick action and retreat. At a
smaller level of analysis, the function of these nerves and muscles likewise relies on the interactions of specific
molecules and ions. Even the three-dimensional structure of certain molecules is essential to their function.
Your study of anatomy and physiology will make more sense if you continually relate the form of the structures you
are studying to their function. In fact, it can be somewhat frustrating to attempt to study anatomy without an
understanding of the physiology that a body structure supports. Imagine, for example, trying to appreciate the
unique arrangement of the bones of the human hand if you had no conception of the function of the hand.
Fortunately, your understanding of how the human hand manipulates tools—from pens to cell phones—helps you
appreciate the unique alignment of the thumb in opposition to the four fingers, making your hand a structure that
allows you to pinch and grasp objects and type text messages.
1.2 Structural Organization of the Human Body
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure of the human body in terms of six levels of organization
•
List the eleven organ systems of the human body and identify at least one organ and one major function of each
Before you begin to study the different structures and functions of the human body, it is helpful to consider its basic
architecture; that is, how its smallest parts are assembled into larger structures. It is convenient to consider the
structures of the body in terms of fundamental levels of organization that increase in complexity: subatomic
particles, atoms, molecules, organelles, cells, tissues, organs, organ systems, organisms and biosphere (Figure 1.3).
1.2 • Structural Organization of the Human Body
9
FIGURE 1.3
Levels of Structural Organization of the Human Body
The organization of the body often is discussed in terms of six
distinct levels of increasing complexity, from the smallest chemical building blocks to a unique human organism.
The Levels of Organization
To study the chemical level of organization, scientists consider the simplest building blocks of matter: subatomic
particles, atoms and molecules. All matter in the universe is composed of one or more unique pure substances
called elements, familiar examples of which are hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, calcium, and iron. The smallest
unit of any of these pure substances (elements) is an atom. Atoms are made up of subatomic particles such as the
proton, electron and neutron. Two or more atoms combine to form a molecule, such as the water molecules,
proteins, and sugars found in living things. Molecules are the chemical building blocks of all body structures.
A cell is the smallest independently functioning unit of a living organism. Even bacteria, which are extremely small,
independently-living organisms, have a cellular structure. Each bacterium is a single cell. All living structures of
human anatomy contain cells, and almost all functions of human physiology are performed in cells or are initiated by
cells.
10
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
A human cell typically consists of flexible membranes that enclose cytoplasm, a water-based cellular fluid together
with a variety of tiny functioning units called organelles. In humans, as in all organisms, cells perform all functions
of life. A tissue is a group of many similar cells (though sometimes composed of a few related types) that work
together to perform a specific function. An organ is an anatomically distinct structure of the body composed of two
or more tissue types. Each organ performs one or more specific physiological functions. An organ system is a group
of organs that work together to perform major functions or meet physiological needs of the body.
This book covers eleven distinct organ systems in the human body (Figure 1.4 and Figure 1.5). Assigning organs to
organ systems can be imprecise since organs that “belong” to one system can also have functions integral to
another system. In fact, most organs contribute to more than one system.
In this book and throughout your studies of biological sciences, you will often read descriptions related to
similarities and differences among biological structures, processes, and health related to a person's biological sex.
People often use the words "female" and "male" to describe two different concepts: our sense of gender identity,
and our biological sex as determined by our chromosomes, hormones, organs, and other physical characteristics.
For some people, gender identity is different from biological sex or their sex assigned at birth. Throughout this book,
"female" and "male" refer to sex only, and the typical anatomy and physiology of XX and XY individuals is discussed.
1.2 • Structural Organization of the Human Body
11
FIGURE 1.4
Organ Systems of the Human Body
Organs that work together are grouped into organ systems.
12
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 1.5
Organ Systems of the Human Body (continued)
Organs that work together are grouped into organ systems.
The organism level is the highest level of organization. An organism is a living being that has a cellular structure and
that can independently perform all physiologic functions necessary for life. In multicellular organisms, including
humans, all cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems of the body work together to maintain the life and health of the
1.2 • Structural Organization of the Human Body
13
organism.
1.3 Functions of Human Life
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the importance of organization to the function of the human organism
•
Distinguish between metabolism, anabolism, and catabolism
•
Provide at least two examples of human responsiveness and human movement
•
Compare and contrast growth, differentiation, and reproduction
The different organ systems each have different functions and therefore unique roles to perform in physiology.
These many functions can be summarized in terms of a few that we might consider definitive of human life:
organization, metabolism, responsiveness, movement, development, and reproduction.
Organization
A human body consists of trillions of cells organized in a way that maintains distinct internal compartments. These
compartments keep body cells separated from external environmental threats and keep the cells moist and
nourished. They also separate internal body fluids from the countless microorganisms that grow on body surfaces,
including the lining of certain passageways that connect to the outer surface of the body. The intestinal tract, for
example, is home to more bacterial cells than the total of all human cells in the body, yet these bacteria are outside
the body and cannot be allowed to circulate freely inside the body.
Cells, for example, have a cell membrane (also referred to as the plasma membrane) that keeps the intracellular
environment—the fluids and organelles—separate from the extracellular environment. Blood vessels keep blood
inside a closed circulatory system, and nerves and muscles are wrapped in connective tissue sheaths that separate
them from surrounding structures. In the chest and abdomen, a variety of internal membranes keep major organs
such as the lungs, heart, and kidneys separate from others.
The body’s largest organ system is the integumentary system, which includes the skin and its associated structures,
such as hair and nails. The surface tissue of skin is a barrier that protects internal structures and fluids from
potentially harmful microorganisms and other toxins.
Metabolism
The first law of thermodynamics holds that energy can neither be created nor destroyed—it can only change form.
Your basic function as an organism is to consume (ingest) energy and molecules in the foods you eat, convert some
of it into fuel for movement, sustain your body functions, and build and maintain your body structures. There are two
types of reactions that accomplish this: anabolism and catabolism.
•
Anabolism is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger, more complex
substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex chemicals it needs by combining small
molecules derived from the foods you eat
•
Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into smaller simpler
molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in foods are broken down so the body
can use their parts to assemble the structures and substances needed for life.
Taken together, these two processes are called metabolism. Metabolism is the sum of all anabolic and catabolic
reactions that take place in the body (Figure 1.6). Both anabolism and catabolism occur simultaneously and
continuously to keep you alive.
14
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 1.6
Metabolism
Anabolic reactions are building reactions, and they consume energy. Catabolic reactions break materials down
and release energy. Metabolism includes both anabolic and catabolic reactions.
Every cell in your body makes use of a chemical compound, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to store and release
energy. The cell stores energy in the synthesis (anabolism) of ATP, then moves the ATP molecules to the location
where energy is needed to fuel cellular activities. Then the ATP is broken down (catabolism) and a controlled
amount of energy is released, which is used by the cell to perform a particular job.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/metabolic) to learn more about metabolic processes. Which organs of the
body likely carry out anabolic processes? What about catabolic processes?
Responsiveness
Responsiveness is the ability of an organism to adjust to changes in its internal and external environments. An
example of responsiveness to external stimuli could include moving toward sources of food and water and away
from perceived dangers. Changes in an organism’s internal environment, such as increased body temperature, can
cause the responses of sweating and the dilation of blood vessels in the skin in order to decrease body temperature,
as shown by the runners in Figure 1.7.
Movement
Human movement includes not only actions at the joints of the body, but also the motion of individual organs and
even individual cells. As you read these words, red and white blood cells are moving throughout your body, muscle
cells are contracting and relaxing to maintain your posture and to focus your vision, and glands are secreting
chemicals to regulate body functions. Your body is coordinating the action of entire muscle groups to enable you to
move air into and out of your lungs, to push blood throughout your body, and to propel the food you have eaten
through your digestive tract. Consciously, of course, you contract your skeletal muscles to move the bones of your
skeleton to get from one place to another (as the runners are doing in Figure 1.7), and to carry out all of the activities
of your daily life.
1.3 • Functions of Human Life
15
FIGURE 1.7
Marathon Runners
Runners demonstrate two characteristics of living humans—responsiveness and movement. Anatomic
structures and physiological processes allow runners to coordinate the action of muscle groups and sweat in response to rising internal
body temperature. (credit: Phil Roeder/flickr)
Development, growth and reproduction
Development is all of the changes the body goes through in life. Development includes the process of
differentiation, in which unspecialized cells become specialized in structure and function to perform certain tasks
in the body. Development also includes the processes of growth and repair, both of which involve cell differentiation.
Growth is the increase in body size. Humans, like all multicellular organisms, grow by increasing the number of
existing cells, increasing the amount of non-cellular material around cells (such as mineral deposits in bone), and,
within very narrow limits, increasing the size of existing cells.
Reproduction is the formation of a new organism from parent organisms. In humans, reproduction is carried out by
the male and female reproductive systems. Because death will come to all complex organisms, without
reproduction, the line of organisms would end.
1.4 Requirements for Human Life
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the role of oxygen and nutrients in maintaining human survival
•
Explain why extreme heat and extreme cold threaten human survival
•
Explain how the pressure exerted by gases and fluids influences human survival
Humans have been acclimating to life on Earth for at least the past 200,000 years. Earth and its atmosphere have
provided us with air to breathe, water to drink, and food to eat, but these are not the only requirements for survival.
Although you may rarely think about it, you also cannot live outside of a certain range of temperature and pressure
that the surface of our planet and its atmosphere provides. The next sections explore these four requirements of
life.
Oxygen
Atmospheric air is only about 20 percent oxygen, but that oxygen is a key component of the chemical reactions that
keep the body alive, including the reactions that produce ATP. Brain cells are especially sensitive to lack of oxygen
because of their requirement for a high-and-steady production of ATP. Brain damage is likely within five minutes
without oxygen, and death is likely within ten minutes.
16
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
Nutrients
A nutrient is a substance in foods and beverages that is essential to human survival. The three basic classes of
nutrients are water, the energy-yielding and body-building nutrients, and the micronutrients (vitamins and
minerals).
The most critical nutrient is water. Depending on the environmental temperature and our state of health, we may be
able to survive for only a few days without water. The body’s functional chemicals are dissolved and transported in
water, and the chemical reactions of life take place in water. Moreover, water is the largest component of cells,
blood, and the fluid between cells, and water makes up about 70 percent of an adult’s body mass. Water also helps
regulate our internal temperature and cushions, protects, and lubricates joints and many other body structures.
The energy-yielding nutrients are primarily carbohydrates and lipids, while proteins mainly supply the amino acids
that are the building blocks of the body itself. You ingest these in plant and animal foods and beverages, and the
digestive system breaks them down into molecules small enough to be absorbed. The breakdown products of
carbohydrates and lipids can then be used in the metabolic processes that convert them to ATP. Although you might
feel as if you are starving after missing a single meal, you can survive without consuming the energy-yielding
nutrients for at least several weeks.
Water and the energy-yielding nutrients are also referred to as macronutrients because the body needs them in
large amounts. In contrast, micronutrients are vitamins and minerals. These elements and compounds participate in
many essential chemical reactions and processes, such as nerve impulses, and some, such as calcium, also
contribute to the body’s structure. Your body can store some of the micronutrients in its tissues, and draw on those
reserves if you fail to consume them in your diet for a few days or weeks. Some others micronutrients, such as
vitamin C and most of the B vitamins, are water-soluble and cannot be stored, so you need to consume them every
day or two.
Narrow Range of Temperature
You have probably seen news stories about athletes who died of heat stroke, or hikers who died of exposure to cold.
Such deaths occur because the chemical reactions upon which the body depends can only take place within a
narrow range of body temperature, from just below to just above 37°C (98.6°F). When body temperature rises well
above or drops well below normal, certain proteins (enzymes) that facilitate chemical reactions lose their normal
structure and their ability to function and the chemical reactions of metabolism cannot proceed.
That said, the body can respond effectively to short-term exposure to heat (Figure 1.8) or cold. One of the body’s
responses to heat is, of course, sweating. As sweat evaporates from skin, it removes some thermal energy from the
body, cooling it. Adequate water (from the extracellular fluid in the body) is necessary to produce sweat, so
adequate fluid intake is essential to balance that loss during the sweat response. Not surprisingly, the sweat
response is much less effective in a humid environment because the air is already saturated with water. Thus, the
sweat on the skin’s surface is not able to evaporate, and internal body temperature can get dangerously high.
1.4 • Requirements for Human Life
17
FIGURE 1.8
Extreme Heat
Humans acclimate to some degree to repeated exposure to high temperatures. (credit: McKay Savage/flickr)
The body can also respond effectively to short-term exposure to cold. One response to cold is shivering, which is
random muscle movement that generates heat. Another response is increased breakdown of stored energy to
generate heat. When that energy reserve is depleted, however, and the core temperature begins to drop
significantly, red blood cells will lose their ability to give up oxygen, denying the brain of this critical component of
ATP production. This lack of oxygen can cause confusion, lethargy, and eventually loss of consciousness and death.
The body responds to cold by reducing blood circulation to the extremities, the hands and feet, in order to prevent
blood from cooling there and so that the body’s core can stay warm. Even when core body temperature remains
stable, however, tissues exposed to severe cold, especially the fingers and toes, can develop frostbite when blood
flow to the extremities has been much reduced. This form of tissue damage can be permanent and lead to gangrene,
requiring amputation of the affected region.
Everyday Connection
Controlled Hypothermia
As you have learned, the body continuously engages in coordinated physiological processes to maintain a stable
temperature. In some cases, however, overriding this system can be useful, or even life-saving. Hypothermia is
the clinical term for an abnormally low body temperature (hypo- = “below” or “under”). Controlled hypothermia
is clinically induced hypothermia performed in order to reduce the metabolic rate of an organ or of a person’s
entire body.
Controlled hypothermia often is used, for example, during open-heart surgery because it decreases the
metabolic needs of the brain, heart, and other organs, reducing the risk of damage to them. When controlled
hypothermia is used clinically, the patient is given medication to prevent shivering. The body is then cooled to
25–32°C (79–89°F). The heart is stopped and an external heart-lung pump maintains circulation to the patient’s
body. The heart is cooled further and is maintained at a temperature below 15°C (60°F) for the duration of the
surgery. This very cold temperature helps the heart muscle to tolerate its lack of blood supply during the
surgery.
Some emergency department physicians use controlled hypothermia to reduce damage to the heart in patients
who have suffered a cardiac arrest. In the emergency department, the physician induces coma and lowers the
patient’s body temperature to approximately 91 degrees. This condition, which is maintained for 24 hours,
slows the patient’s metabolic rate. Because the patient’s organs require less blood to function, the heart’s
workload is reduced.
18
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
Narrow Range of Atmospheric Pressure
Pressure is a force exerted by a substance that is in contact with another substance. Atmospheric pressure is
pressure exerted by the mixture of gases (primarily nitrogen and oxygen) in the Earth’s atmosphere. Although you
may not perceive it, atmospheric pressure is constantly pressing down on your body. This pressure keeps gases
within your body, such as the gaseous nitrogen in body fluids, dissolved. If you were suddenly ejected from a space
ship above Earth’s atmosphere, you would go from a situation of normal pressure to one of very low pressure. The
pressure of the nitrogen gas in your blood would be much higher than the pressure of nitrogen in the space
surrounding your body. As a result, the nitrogen gas in your blood would expand, forming bubbles that could block
blood vessels and even cause cells to break apart.
Atmospheric pressure does more than just keep blood gases dissolved. Your ability to breathe—that is, to take in
oxygen and release carbon dioxide—also depends upon a precise atmospheric pressure. Altitude sickness occurs in
part because the atmosphere at high altitudes exerts less pressure, reducing the exchange of these gases, and
causing shortness of breath, confusion, headache, lethargy, and nausea. Mountain climbers carry oxygen to reduce
the effects of both low oxygen levels and low barometric pressure at higher altitudes (Figure 1.9).
FIGURE 1.9
Harsh Conditions
Climbers on Mount Everest must accommodate extreme cold, low oxygen levels, and low barometric
pressure in an environment hostile to human life. (credit: Melanie Ko/flickr)
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Decompression Sickness
Decompression sickness (DCS) is a condition in which gases dissolved in the blood or in other body tissues are no
longer dissolved following a reduction in pressure on the body. This condition affects underwater divers who surface
from a deep dive too quickly, and it can affect pilots flying at high altitudes in planes with unpressurized cabins.
Divers often call this condition “the bends,” a reference to joint pain that is a symptom of DCS.
In all cases, DCS is brought about by a reduction in barometric pressure. At high altitude, barometric pressure is
much less than on Earth’s surface because pressure is produced by the weight of the column of air above the body
pressing down on the body. The very great pressures on divers in deep water are likewise from the weight of a
column of water pressing down on the body. For divers, DCS occurs at normal barometric pressure (at sea level), but
it is brought on by the relatively rapid decrease of pressure as divers rise from the high pressure conditions of deep
water to the now low, by comparison, pressure at sea level. Not surprisingly, diving in deep mountain lakes, where
barometric pressure at the surface of the lake is less than that at sea level is more likely to result in DCS than diving
in water at sea level.
In DCS, gases dissolved in the blood (primarily nitrogen) come rapidly out of solution, forming bubbles in the blood
and in other body tissues. This occurs because when pressure of a gas over a liquid is decreased, the amount of gas
that can remain dissolved in the liquid also is decreased. It is air pressure that keeps your normal blood gases
1.4 • Requirements for Human Life
19
dissolved in the blood. When pressure is reduced, less gas remains dissolved. You have seen this in effect when you
open a carbonated drink. Removing the seal of the bottle reduces the pressure of the gas over the liquid. This in turn
causes bubbles as dissolved gases (in this case, carbon dioxide) come out of solution in the liquid.
The most common symptoms of DCS are pain in the joints, with headache and disturbances of vision occurring in 10
percent to 15 percent of cases. Left untreated, very severe DCS can result in death. Immediate treatment is with
pure oxygen. The affected person is then moved into a hyperbaric chamber. A hyperbaric chamber is a reinforced,
closed chamber that is pressurized to greater than atmospheric pressure. It treats DCS by repressurizing the body
so that pressure can then be removed much more gradually. Because the hyperbaric chamber introduces oxygen to
the body at high pressure, it increases the concentration of oxygen in the blood. This has the effect of replacing
some of the nitrogen in the blood with oxygen, which is easier to tolerate out of solution.
The dynamic pressure of body fluids is also important to human survival. For example, blood pressure, which is the
pressure exerted by blood as it flows within blood vessels, must be great enough to enable blood to reach all body
tissues, and yet low enough to ensure that the delicate blood vessels can withstand the friction and force of the
pulsating flow of pressurized blood.
1.5 Homeostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the role of homeostasis in healthy functioning
•
Contrast negative and positive feedback, giving one physiologic example of each mechanism
Maintaining homeostasis requires that the body continuously monitor its internal conditions. From body
temperature to blood pressure to levels of certain nutrients, each physiological condition has a particular set point.
A set point is the physiological value around which the normal range fluctuates. A normal range is the restricted set
of values that is optimally healthful and stable. For example, the set point for normal human body temperature is
approximately 37°C (98.6°F) Physiological parameters, such as body temperature and blood pressure, tend to
fluctuate within a normal range a few degrees above and below that point. Control centers in the brain and other
parts of the body monitor and react to deviations from homeostasis using negative feedback. Negative feedback is
a mechanism that reverses a deviation from the set point. Therefore, negative feedback maintains body parameters
within their normal range. The maintenance of homeostasis by negative feedback goes on throughout the body at all
times, and an understanding of negative feedback is thus fundamental to an understanding of human physiology.
Negative Feedback
A negative feedback system has three basic components (Figure 1.10a). A sensor, also referred to a receptor, is a
component of a feedback system that monitors a physiological value. This value is reported to the control center.
The control center is the component in a feedback system that compares the value to the normal range. If the value
deviates too much from the set point, then the control center activates an effector. An effector is the component in
a feedback system that causes a change to reverse the situation and return the value to the normal range.
20
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 1.10
Negative Feedback System
In a negative feedback system, a stimulus—a deviation from a set point—is resisted through
a physiological process that returns the body to homeostasis. (a) A negative feedback system has five basic parts. (b) Body temperature is
regulated by negative feedback.
In order to set the system in motion, a stimulus must drive a physiological parameter beyond its normal range (that
is, beyond homeostasis). This stimulus is “heard” by a specific sensor. For example, in the control of blood glucose,
specific endocrine cells in the pancreas detect excess glucose (the stimulus) in the bloodstream. These pancreatic
beta cells respond to the increased level of blood glucose by releasing the hormone insulin into the bloodstream.
The insulin signals skeletal muscle fibers, fat cells (adipocytes), and liver cells to take up the excess glucose,
removing it from the bloodstream. As glucose concentration in the bloodstream drops, the decrease in
concentration—the actual negative feedback—is detected by pancreatic alpha cells, and insulin release stops. This
prevents blood sugar levels from continuing to drop below the normal range.
Humans have a similar temperature regulation feedback system that works by promoting either heat loss or heat
gain (Figure 1.10b). When the brain’s temperature regulation center receives data from the sensors indicating that
the body’s temperature exceeds its normal range, it stimulates a cluster of brain cells referred to as the “heat-loss
center.” This stimulation has three major effects:
•
Blood vessels in the skin begin to dilate allowing more blood from the body core to flow to the surface of the
skin allowing the heat to radiate into the environment.
•
As blood flow to the skin increases, sweat glands are activated to increase their output. As the sweat
evaporates from the skin surface into the surrounding air, it takes heat with it.
•
The depth of respiration increases, and a person may breathe through an open mouth instead of through the
nasal passageways. This further increases heat loss from the lungs.
In contrast, activation of the brain’s heat-gain center by exposure to cold reduces blood flow to the skin, and blood
returning from the limbs is diverted into a network of deep veins. This arrangement traps heat closer to the body
core and restricts heat loss. If heat loss is severe, the brain triggers an increase in random signals to skeletal
muscles, causing them to contract and producing shivering. The muscle contractions of shivering release heat while
using up ATP. The brain triggers the thyroid gland in the endocrine system to release thyroid hormone, which
increases metabolic activity and heat production in cells throughout the body. The brain also signals the adrenal
glands to release epinephrine (adrenaline), a hormone that causes the breakdown of glycogen into glucose, which
can be used as an energy source. The breakdown of glycogen into glucose also results in increased metabolism and
heat production.
1.5 • Homeostasis
21
INTERACTIVE LINK
Water concentration in the body is critical for proper functioning. A person’s body retains very tight control on water
levels without conscious control by the person. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/H2Ocon) to learn more about
water concentration in the body. Which organ has primary control over the amount of water in the body?
Positive Feedback
Positive feedback intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing it. A deviation
from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves farther away from the normal range. Positive
feedback in the body is normal only when there is a definite end point. Childbirth and the body’s response to blood
loss are two examples of positive feedback loops that are normal but are activated only when needed.
Childbirth at full term is an example of a situation in which the maintenance of the existing body state is not desired.
Enormous changes in a person’s body are required to expel the baby at the end of pregnancy. And the events of
childbirth, once begun, must progress rapidly to a conclusion or the life of a person giving bith and the baby are at
risk. The extreme muscular work of labor and delivery are the result of a positive feedback system (Figure 1.11).
FIGURE 1.11
Positive Feedback Loop
Normal childbirth is driven by a positive feedback loop. A positive feedback loop results in a
change in the body’s status, rather than a return to homeostasis.
The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the cervix (the lowest part of the uterus). The
cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching (the sensors). These nerve cells
send messages to the brain, which in turn causes the pituitary gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone
oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the
effectors), pushing the baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater stretching of the cervix. The
cycle of stretching, oxytocin release, and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the baby is born.
At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the release of oxytocin.
A second example of positive feedback centers on reversing extreme damage to the body. Following a penetrating
wound, the most immediate threat is excessive blood loss. Less blood circulating means reduced blood pressure
and reduced perfusion (penetration of blood) to the brain and other vital organs. If perfusion is severely reduced,
vital organs will shut down and the person will die. The body responds to this potential catastrophe by releasing
substances in the injured blood vessel wall that begin the process of blood clotting. As each step of clotting occurs,
22
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
it stimulates the release of more clotting substances. This accelerates the processes of clotting and sealing off the
damaged area. Clotting is contained in a local area based on the tightly controlled availability of clotting proteins.
This is an adaptive, life-saving cascade of events.
1.6 Anatomical Terminology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Demonstrate the anatomical position
•
Describe the human body using directional and regional terms
•
Identify three planes most commonly used in the study of anatomy
•
Distinguish between the posterior (dorsal) and the anterior (ventral) body cavities, identifying their subdivisions
and representative organs found in each
•
Describe serous membrane and explain its function
Anatomists and health care providers use terminology that can be bewildering to the uninitiated. However, the
purpose of this language is not to confuse, but rather to increase precision and reduce medical errors. For example,
is a scar “above the wrist” located on the forearm two or three inches away from the hand? Or is it at the base of the
hand? Is it on the palm-side or back-side? By using precise anatomical terminology, we eliminate ambiguity.
Anatomical terms derive from ancient Greek and Latin words. Because these languages are no longer used in
everyday conversation, the meaning of their words does not change.
Anatomical terms are made up of roots, prefixes, and suffixes. The root of a term often refers to an organ, tissue, or
condition, whereas the prefix or suffix often describes the root. For example, in the disorder hypertension, the prefix
“hyper-” means “high” or “over,” and the root word “tension” refers to pressure, so the word “hypertension” refers
to abnormally high blood pressure.
Anatomical Position
To further increase precision, anatomists standardize the way in which they view the body. Just as maps are
normally oriented with north at the top, the standard body “map,” or anatomical position, is that of the body
standing upright, with the feet at shoulder width and parallel, toes forward. The upper limbs are held out to each
side, and the palms of the hands face forward as illustrated in Figure 1.12. Using this standard position reduces
confusion. It does not matter how the body being described is oriented, the terms are used as if it is in anatomical
position. For example, a scar in the “anterior (front) carpal (wrist) region” would be present on the palm side of the
wrist. The term “anterior” would be used even if the hand were palm down on a table.
1.6 • Anatomical Terminology
23
FIGURE 1.12
Regions of the Human Body
The human body is shown in anatomical position in an (a) anterior view and a (b) posterior
view. The regions of the body are labeled in boldface.
A body that is lying down is described as either prone or supine. Prone describes a face-down orientation, and
supine describes a face up orientation. These terms are sometimes used in describing the position of the body
during specific physical examinations or surgical procedures.
Regional Terms
The human body’s numerous regions have specific terms to help increase precision (see Figure 1.12). Notice that
the term “brachium” or “arm” is reserved for the “upper arm” and “antebrachium” or “forearm” is used rather than
“lower arm.” Similarly, “femur” or “thigh” is correct, and “leg” or “crus” is reserved for the portion of the lower limb
between the knee and the ankle. You will be able to describe the body’s regions using the terms from the figure.
Directional Terms
Certain directional anatomical terms appear throughout this and any other anatomy textbook (Figure 1.13). These
terms are essential for describing the relative locations of different body structures. For instance, an anatomist
might describe one band of tissue as “inferior to” another or a physician might describe a tumor as “superficial to” a
deeper body structure. Commit these terms to memory to avoid confusion when you are studying or describing the
locations of particular body parts.
•
Anterior (or ventral) Describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes are anterior to the
foot.
•
Posterior (or dorsal) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The popliteus is posterior to
the patella.
•
Superior (or cranial) describes a position above or higher than another part of the body proper. The orbits are
superior to the oris.
24
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
•
Inferior (or caudal) describes a position below or lower than another part of the body proper; near or toward
the tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the spinal column). The pelvis is inferior to the abdomen.
•
Lateral describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is lateral to the digits.
•
Medial describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the medial toe.
•
Proximal describes a position in a limb that is nearer to the point of attachment or the trunk of the body. The
brachium is proximal to the antebrachium.
•
Distal describes a position in a limb that is farther from the point of attachment or the trunk of the body. The
crus is distal to the femur.
•
Superficial describes a position closer to the surface of the body. The skin is superficial to the bones.
•
Deep describes a position farther from the surface of the body. The brain is deep to the skull.
FIGURE 1.13
Directional Terms Applied to the Human Body
Paired directional terms are shown as applied to the human body.
Body Planes
A section is a two-dimensional surface of a three-dimensional structure that has been cut. Modern medical imaging
devices enable clinicians to obtain “virtual sections” of living bodies. We call these scans. Body sections and scans
can be correctly interpreted, however, only if the viewer understands the plane along which the section was made. A
plane is an imaginary two-dimensional surface that passes through the body. There are three planes commonly
referred to in anatomy and medicine, as illustrated in Figure 1.14.
•
The sagittal plane is the plane that divides the body or an organ vertically into right and left sides. If this
vertical plane runs directly down the middle of the body, it is called the midsagittal or median plane. If it divides
the body into unequal right and left sides, it is called a parasagittal plane or less commonly a longitudinal
section.
•
The frontal plane is the plane that divides the body or an organ into an anterior (front) portion and a posterior
(rear) portion. The frontal plane is often referred to as a coronal plane. (“Corona” is Latin for “crown.”)
•
The transverse plane is the plane that divides the body or organ horizontally into upper and lower portions.
1.6 • Anatomical Terminology
25
Transverse planes produce images referred to as cross sections.
FIGURE 1.14
Planes of the Body
The three planes most commonly used in anatomical and medical imaging are the sagittal, frontal (or
coronal), and transverse plane.
Body Cavities and Serous Membranes
The body maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that separate
compartments. The dorsal (posterior) cavity and the ventral (anterior) cavity are the largest body compartments
(Figure 1.15). These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for significant
changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions. The lungs, heart, stomach, and
intestines, for example, can expand and contract without distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby
organs.
FIGURE 1.15
Dorsal and Ventral Body Cavities
The ventral cavity includes the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their
subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes the cranial and spinal cavities.
26
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
Subdivisions of the Posterior (Dorsal) and Anterior (Ventral) Cavities
The posterior (dorsal) and anterior (ventral) cavities are each subdivided into smaller cavities. In the posterior
(dorsal) cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity (or vertebral cavity) encloses the spinal
cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted structure, the cranial and spinal cavities
that house them are also continuous. The brain and spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral
column and by cerebrospinal fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord
within the posterior (dorsal) cavity.
The anterior (ventral) cavity has two main subdivisions: the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity (see
Figure 1.15). The thoracic cavity is the more superior subdivision of the anterior cavity, and it is enclosed by the rib
cage. The thoracic cavity contains the lungs and the heart, which is located in the mediastinum. The diaphragm
forms the floor of the thoracic cavity and separates it from the more inferior abdominopelvic cavity. The
abdominopelvic cavity is the largest cavity in the body. Although no membrane physically divides the
abdominopelvic cavity, it can be useful to distinguish between the abdominal cavity, the division that houses the
digestive organs, and the pelvic cavity, the division that houses the organs of reproduction.
Abdominal Regions and Quadrants
To promote clear communication, for instance about the location of a patient’s abdominal pain or a suspicious mass,
health care providers typically divide up the cavity into either nine regions or four quadrants (Figure 1.16).
FIGURE 1.16
Regions and Quadrants of the Peritoneal Cavity
There are (a) nine abdominal regions and (b) four abdominal
quadrants in the peritoneal cavity.
The more detailed regional approach subdivides the cavity with one horizontal line immediately inferior to the ribs
and one immediately superior to the pelvis, and two vertical lines drawn as if dropped from the midpoint of each
clavicle (collarbone). There are nine resulting regions. The simpler quadrants approach, which is more commonly
used in medicine, subdivides the cavity with one horizontal and one vertical line that intersect at the patient’s
umbilicus (navel).
Membranes of the Anterior (Ventral) Body Cavity
A serous membrane (also referred to a serosa) is one of the thin membranes that cover the walls and organs in the
thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities. The parietal layers of the membranes line the walls of the body cavity (pariet-
refers to a cavity wall). The visceral layer of the membrane covers the organs (the viscera). Between the parietal and
visceral layers is a very thin, fluid-filled serous space, or cavity (Figure 1.17).
1.6 • Anatomical Terminology
27
FIGURE 1.17
Serous Membrane
Serous membrane lines the pericardial cavity and reflects back to cover the heart—much the same
way that an underinflated balloon would form two layers surrounding a fist.
There are three serous cavities and their associated membranes. The pleura is the serous membrane that encloses
the pleural cavity; the pleural cavity surrounds the lungs. The pericardium is the serous membrane that encloses
the pericardial cavity; the pericardial cavity surrounds the heart. The peritoneum is the serous membrane that
encloses the peritoneal cavity; the peritoneal cavity surrounds several organs in the abdominopelvic cavity. The
serous membranes form fluid-filled sacs, or cavities, that are meant to cushion and reduce friction on internal
organs when they move, such as when the lungs inflate or the heart beats. Both the parietal and visceral serosa
secrete the thin, slippery serous fluid located within the serous cavities. The pleural cavity reduces friction between
the lungs and the body wall. Likewise, the pericardial cavity reduces friction between the heart and the wall of the
pericardium. The peritoneal cavity reduces friction between the abdominal and pelvic organs and the body wall.
Therefore, serous membranes provide additional protection to the viscera they enclose by reducing friction that
could lead to inflammation of the organs.
1.7 Medical Imaging
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the uses and drawbacks of X-ray imaging
•
Identify four modern medical imaging techniques and how they are used
For thousands of years, fear of the dead and legal sanctions limited the ability of anatomists and physicians to study
the internal structures of the human body. An inability to control bleeding, infection, and pain made surgeries
infrequent, and those that were performed—such as wound suturing, amputations, tooth and tumor removals, skull
drilling, and cesarean births—did not greatly advance knowledge about internal anatomy. Theories about the
function of the body and about disease were therefore largely based on external observations and imagination.
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, however, the detailed anatomical drawings of Italian artist and
anatomist Leonardo da Vinci and Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius were published, and interest in human
anatomy began to increase. Medical schools began to teach anatomy using human dissection; although some
resorted to grave robbing to obtain corpses. Laws were eventually passed that enabled students to dissect the
corpses of criminals and those who donated their bodies for research. Still, it was not until the late nineteenth
century that medical researchers discovered non-surgical methods to look inside the living body.
X-Rays
German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen (1845–1923) was experimenting with electrical current when he discovered that
a mysterious and invisible “ray” would pass through his flesh but leave an outline of his bones on a screen coated
with a metal compound. In 1895, Röntgen made the first durable record of the internal parts of a living human: an
“X-ray” image (as it came to be called) of his wife’s hand. Scientists around the world quickly began their own
experiments with X-rays, and by 1900, X-rays were widely used to detect a variety of injuries and diseases. In 1901,
Röntgen was awarded the first Nobel Prize for physics for his work in this field.
The X-ray is a form of high energy electromagnetic radiation with a short wavelength capable of penetrating solids
28
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
and ionizing gases. As they are used in medicine, X-rays are emitted from an X-ray machine and directed toward a
specially treated metallic plate placed behind the patient’s body. The beam of radiation results in darkening of the
X-ray plate. X-rays are slightly impeded by soft tissues, which show up as gray on the X-ray plate, whereas hard
tissues, such as bone, largely block the rays, producing a light-toned “shadow.” Thus, X-rays are best used to
visualize hard body structures such as teeth and bones (Figure 1.18). Like many forms of high energy radiation,
however, X-rays are capable of damaging cells and initiating changes that can lead to cancer. This danger of
excessive exposure to X-rays was not fully appreciated for many years after their widespread use.
FIGURE 1.18
X-Ray of a Hand
High energy electromagnetic radiation allows the internal structures of the body, such as bones, to be
seen in X-rays like these. (credit: Trace Meek/flickr)
Refinements and enhancements of X-ray techniques have continued throughout the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries. Although often supplanted by more sophisticated imaging techniques, the X-ray remains a “workhorse” in
medical imaging, especially for viewing fractures and for dentistry. The disadvantage of irradiation to the patient and
the operator is now attenuated by proper shielding and by limiting exposure.
Modern Medical Imaging
X-rays can depict a two-dimensional image of a body region, and only from a single angle. In contrast, more recent
medical imaging technologies produce data that is integrated and analyzed by computers to produce three-
dimensional images or images that reveal aspects of body functioning.
Computed Tomography
Tomography refers to imaging by sections. Computed tomography (CT) is a noninvasive imaging technique that
uses computers to analyze several cross-sectional X-rays in order to reveal minute details about structures in the
body (Figure 1.19a). The technique was invented in the 1970s and is based on the principle that, as X-rays pass
through the body, they are absorbed or reflected at different levels. In the technique, a patient lies on a motorized
platform while a computerized axial tomography (CAT) scanner rotates 360 degrees around the patient, taking X-ray
images. A computer combines these images into a two-dimensional view of the scanned area, or “slice.”
1.7 • Medical Imaging
29
FIGURE 1.19
Medical Imaging Techniques
(a) The results of a CT scan of the head are shown as successive transverse sections. (b) An
MRI machine generates a magnetic field around a patient. (c) PET scans use radiopharmaceuticals to create images of active blood flow
and physiologic activity of the organ or organs being targeted. (d) Ultrasound technology is used to monitor pregnancies because it is the
least invasive of imaging techniques and uses no electromagnetic radiation. (credit a: Akira Ohgaki/flickr; credit b: “Digital Cate”/flickr;
credit c: “Raziel”/Wikimedia Commons; credit d: “Isis”/Wikimedia Commons)
Since 1970, the development of more powerful computers and more sophisticated software has made CT scanning
routine for many types of diagnostic evaluations. It is especially useful for soft tissue scanning, such as of the brain
and the thoracic and abdominal viscera. Its level of detail is so precise that it can allow physicians to measure the
size of a mass down to a millimeter. The main disadvantage of CT scanning is that it exposes patients to a dose of
radiation many times higher than that of X-rays. In fact, children who undergo CT scans are at increased risk of
developing cancer, as are adults who have multiple CT scans.
INTERACTIVE LINK
A CT or CAT scan relies on a circling scanner that revolves around the patient’s body. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/CATscan) to learn more about CT and CAT scans. What type of radiation does a CT scanner
use?
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive medical imaging technique based on a phenomenon of nuclear
physics discovered in the 1930s, in which matter exposed to magnetic fields and radio waves was found to emit
radio signals. In 1970, a physician and researcher named Raymond Damadian noticed that malignant (cancerous)
tissue gave off different signals than normal body tissue. He applied for a patent for the first MRI scanning device,
which was in use clinically by the early 1980s. The early MRI scanners were crude, but advances in digital
computing and electronics led to their advancement over any other technique for precise imaging, especially to
discover tumors. MRI also has the major advantage of not exposing patients to radiation.
Drawbacks of MRI scans include their much higher cost, and patient discomfort with the procedure. The MRI
scanner subjects the patient to such powerful electromagnets that the scan room must be shielded. The patient
30
1 • An Introduction to the Human Body
Access for free at openstax.org
must be enclosed in a metal tube-like device for the duration of the scan (see Figure 1.19b), sometimes as long as
thirty minutes, which can be uncomfortable and impractical for ill patients. The device is also so noisy that, even
with earplugs, patients can become anxious or even fearful. These problems have been overcome somewhat with
the development of “open” MRI scanning, which does not require the patient to be entirely enclosed in the metal
tube. Patients with iron-containing metallic implants (internal sutures, some prosthetic devices, and so on) cannot
undergo MRI scanning because it can dislodge these implants.
Functional MRIs (fMRIs), which detect the concentration of blood flow in certain parts of the body, are increasingly
being used to study the activity in parts of the brain during various body activities. This has helped scientists learn
more about the locations of different brain functions and more about brain abnormalities and diseases.
INTERACTIVE LINK
A patient undergoing an MRI is surrounded by a tube-shaped scanner. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/MRI)
to learn more about MRIs. What is the function of magnets in an MRI?
Positron Emission Tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a medical imaging technique involving the use of so-called
radiopharmaceuticals, substances that emit radiation that is short-lived and therefore relatively safe to administer
to the body. Although the first PET scanner was introduced in 1961, it took 15 more years before
radiopharmaceuticals were combined with the technique and revolutionized its potential. The main advantage is
that PET (see Figure 1.19c) can illustrate physiologic activity—including nutrient metabolism and blood flow—of the
organ or organs being targeted, whereas CT and MRI scans can only show static images. PET is widely used to
diagnose a multitude of conditions, such as heart disease, the spread of cancer, certain forms of infection, brain
abnormalities, bone disease, and thyroid disease.
INTERACTIVE LINK
PET relies on radioactive substances administered several minutes before the scan. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/PET) to learn more about PET. How is PET used in chemotherapy?
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is an imaging technique that uses the transmission of high-frequency sound waves into the body
to generate an echo signal that is converted by a computer into a real-time image of anatomy and physiology (see
Figure 1.19d). Ultrasonography is the least invasive of all imaging techniques, and it is therefore used more freely in
sensitive situations such as pregnancy. The technology was first developed in the 1940s and 1950s.
Ultrasonography is used to study heart function, blood flow in the neck or extremities, certain conditions such as
gallbladder disease, and fetal growth and development. The main disadvantages of ultrasonography are that the
image quality is heavily operator-dependent and that it is unable to penetrate bone and gas.
1.7 • Medical Imaging
31
Key Terms
abdominopelvic cavity
division of the anterior
(ventral) cavity that houses the abdominal and
pelvic viscera
anabolism
assembly of more complex molecules
from simpler molecules
anatomical position
standard reference position
used for describing locations and directions on the
human body
anatomy
science that studies the form and
composition of the body’s structures
anterior
describes the front or direction toward the
front of the body; also referred to as ventral
anterior cavity
larger body cavity located anterior to
the posterior (dorsal) body cavity; includes the
serous membrane-lined pleural cavities for the
lungs, pericardial cavity for the heart, and peritoneal
cavity for the abdominal and pelvic organs; also
referred to as ventral cavity
catabolism
breaking down of more complex
molecules into simpler molecules
caudal
describes a position below or lower than
another part of the body proper; near or toward the
tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the
spinal column); also referred to as inferior
cell
smallest independently functioning unit
of all organisms; in animals, a cell contains
cytoplasm, composed of fluid and organelles
computed tomography (CT)
medical imaging
technique in which a computer-enhanced cross-
sectional X-ray image is obtained
control center
compares values to their normal
range; deviations cause the activation of an effector
cranial
describes a position above or higher than
another part of the body proper; also referred to as
superior
cranial cavity
division of the posterior (dorsal) cavity
that houses the brain
deep
describes a position farther from the surface of
the body
development
changes an organism goes through
during its life
differentiation
process by which unspecialized cells
become specialized in structure and function
distal
describes a position farther from the point of
attachment or the trunk of the body
dorsal
describes the back or direction toward the
back of the body; also referred to as posterior
dorsal cavity
posterior body cavity that houses the
brain and spinal cord; also referred to the posterior
body cavity
effector
organ that can cause a change in a value
frontal plane
two-dimensional, vertical plane that
divides the body or organ into anterior and posterior
portions
gross anatomy
study of the larger structures of the
body, typically with the unaided eye; also referred to
macroscopic anatomy
growth
process of increasing in size
homeostasis
steady state of body systems that living
organisms maintain
inferior
describes a position below or lower than
another part of the body proper; near or toward the
tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the
spinal column); also referred to as caudal
lateral
describes the side or direction toward the side
of the body
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
medical imaging
technique in which a device generates a magnetic
field to obtain detailed sectional images of the
internal structures of the body
medial
describes the middle or direction toward the
middle of the body
metabolism
sum of all of the body’s chemical
reactions
microscopic anatomy
study of very small structures
of the body using magnification
negative feedback
homeostatic mechanism that
tends to stabilize an upset in the body’s
physiological condition by preventing an excessive
response to a stimulus, typically as the stimulus is
removed
normal range
range of values around the set point
that do not cause a reaction by the control center
nutrient
chemical obtained from foods and
beverages that is critical to human survival
organ
functionally distinct structure composed of two
or more types of tissues
organ system
group of organs that work together to
carry out a particular function
organism
living being that has a cellular structure and
that can independently perform all physiologic
functions necessary for life
pericardium
sac that encloses the heart
peritoneum
serous membrane that lines the
abdominopelvic cavity and covers the organs found
there
physiology
science that studies the chemistry,
biochemistry, and physics of the body’s functions
plane
imaginary two-dimensional surface that passes
through the body
pleura
serous membrane that lines the pleural cavity
and covers the lungs
positive feedback
mechanism that intensifies a
change in the body’s physiological condition in
32
1 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
response to a stimulus
positron emission tomography (PET)
medical
imaging technique in which radiopharmaceuticals
are traced to reveal metabolic and physiological
functions in tissues
posterior
describes the back or direction toward the
back of the body; also referred to as dorsal
posterior cavity
posterior body cavity that houses the
brain and spinal cord; also referred to as dorsal
cavity
pressure
force exerted by a substance in contact with
another substance
prone
face down
proximal
describes a position nearer to the point of
attachment or the trunk of the body
regional anatomy
study of the structures that
contribute to specific body regions
renewal
process by which worn-out cells are
replaced
reproduction
process by which new organisms are
generated
responsiveness
ability of an organisms or a system to
adjust to changes in conditions
sagittal plane
two-dimensional, vertical plane that
divides the body or organ into right and left sides
section
in anatomy, a single flat surface of a three-
dimensional structure that has been cut through
sensor
(also, receptor) reports a monitored
physiological value to the control center
serosa
membrane that covers organs and reduces
friction; also referred to as serous membrane
serous membrane
membrane that covers organs and
reduces friction; also referred to as serosa
set point
ideal value for a physiological parameter;
the level or small range within which a physiological
parameter such as blood pressure is stable and
optimally healthful, that is, within its parameters of
homeostasis
spinal cavity
division of the dorsal cavity that houses
the spinal cord; also referred to as vertebral cavity
superficial
describes a position nearer to the surface
of the body
superior
describes a position above or higher than
another part of the body proper; also referred to as
cranial
supine
face up
systemic anatomy
study of the structures that
contribute to specific body systems
thoracic cavity
division of the anterior (ventral) cavity
that houses the heart, lungs, esophagus, and
trachea
tissue
group of similar or closely related cells that act
together to perform a specific function
transverse plane
two-dimensional, horizontal plane
that divides the body or organ into superior and
inferior portions
ultrasonography
application of ultrasonic waves to
visualize subcutaneous body structures such as
tendons and organs
ventral
describes the front or direction toward the
front of the body; also referred to as anterior
ventral cavity
larger body cavity located anterior to
the posterior (dorsal) body cavity; includes the
serous membrane-lined pleural cavities for the
lungs, pericardial cavity for the heart, and peritoneal
cavity for the abdominal and pelvic organs; also
referred to as anterior body cavity
X-ray
form of high energy electromagnetic radiation
with a short wavelength capable of penetrating
solids and ionizing gases; used in medicine as a
diagnostic aid to visualize body structures such as
bones
Chapter Review
1.1 Overview of Anatomy and Physiology
Human anatomy is the scientific study of the body’s
structures. In the past, anatomy has primarily been
studied via observing injuries, and later by the
dissection of anatomical structures of cadavers, but in
the past century, computer-assisted imaging
techniques have allowed clinicians to look inside the
living body. Human physiology is the scientific study of
the chemistry and physics of the structures of the body.
Physiology explains how the structures of the body
work together to maintain life. It is difficult to study
structure (anatomy) without knowledge of function
(physiology). The two disciplines are typically studied
together because form and function are closely related
in all living things.
1.2 Structural Organization of the Human
Body
Life processes of the human body are maintained at
several levels of structural organization. These include
the chemical, cellular, tissue, organ, organ system, and
the organism level. Higher levels of organization are
built from lower levels. Therefore, molecules combine
to form cells, cells combine to form tissues, tissues
combine to form organs, organs combine to form organ
systems, and organ systems combine to form
organisms.
1.3 Functions of Human Life
Most processes that occur in the human body are not
1 • Chapter Review
33
consciously controlled. They occur continuously to
build, maintain, and sustain life. These processes
include: organization, in terms of the maintenance of
essential body boundaries; metabolism, including
energy transfer via anabolic and catabolic reactions;
responsiveness; movement; and growth,
differentiation, reproduction, and renewal.
1.4 Requirements for Human Life
Humans cannot survive for more than a few minutes
without oxygen, for more than several days without
water, and for more than several weeks without
carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, vitamins, and minerals.
Although the body can respond to high temperatures
by sweating and to low temperatures by shivering and
increased fuel consumption, long-term exposure to
extreme heat and cold is not compatible with survival.
The body requires a precise atmospheric pressure to
maintain its gases in solution and to facilitate
respiration—the intake of oxygen and the release of
carbon dioxide. Humans also require blood pressure
high enough to ensure that blood reaches all body
tissues but low enough to avoid damage to blood
vessels.
1.5 Homeostasis
Homeostasis is the activity of cells throughout the body
to maintain the physiological state within a narrow
range that is compatible with life. Homeostasis is
regulated by negative feedback loops and, much less
frequently, by positive feedback loops. Both have the
same components of a stimulus, sensor, control center,
and effector; however, negative feedback loops work to
prevent an excessive response to the stimulus,
whereas positive feedback loops intensify the
response until an end point is reached.
1.6 Anatomical Terminology
Ancient Greek and Latin words are used to build
anatomical terms. A standard reference position for
mapping the body’s structures is the normal
anatomical position. Regions of the body are identified
using terms such as “occipital” that are more precise
than common words and phrases such as “the back of
the head.” Directional terms such as anterior and
posterior are essential for accurately describing the
relative locations of body structures. Images of the
body’s interior commonly align along one of three
planes: the sagittal, frontal, or transverse. The body’s
organs are organized in one of two main
cavities—dorsal (also referred to posterior) and ventral
(also referred to anterior)—which are further sub-
divided according to the structures present in each
area. The serous membranes have two layers—parietal
and visceral—surrounding a fluid filled space. Serous
membranes cover the lungs (pleural serosa), heart
(pericardial serosa), and some abdominopelvic organs
(peritoneal serosa).
1.7 Medical Imaging
Detailed anatomical drawings of the human body first
became available in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries; however, it was not until the end of the
nineteenth century, and the discovery of X-rays, that
anatomists and physicians discovered non-surgical
methods to look inside a living body. Since then, many
other techniques, including CT scans, MRI scans, PET
scans, and ultrasonography, have been developed,
providing more accurate and detailed views of the form
and function of the human body.
Interactive Link Questions
1. View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
metabolic) to learn more about metabolic
processes. What kind of catabolism occurs in the
heart?
2. Water concentration in the body is critical for
proper functioning. A person’s body retains very
tight control on water levels without conscious
control by the person. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/H2Ocon) to learn more about
water concentration in the body. Which organ has
primary control over the amount of water in the
body?
3. A CT or CAT scan relies on a circling scanner that
revolves around the patient’s body. Watch this
video (http://openstax.org/l/CATscan) to learn more
about CT and CAT scans. What type of radiation
does a CT scanner use?
4. A patient undergoing an MRI is surrounded by a
tube-shaped scanner. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/MRI) to learn more about
MRIs. What is the function of magnets in an MRI?
5. PET relies on radioactive substances administered
several minutes before the scan. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/PET) to learn more about
PET. How is PET used in chemotherapy?
34
1 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
Review Questions
6. Which of the following specialties might focus on
studying all of the structures of the ankle and foot?
a.
microscopic anatomy
b.
muscle anatomy
c.
regional anatomy
d.
systemic anatomy
7. A scientist wants to study how the body uses foods
and fluids during a marathon run. This scientist is
most likely a(n) ________.
a.
exercise physiologist
b.
microscopic anatomist
c.
regional physiologist
d.
systemic anatomist
8. The smallest independently functioning biological
unit of an organism is a(n) ________.
a.
cell
b.
molecule
c.
organ
d.
tissue
9. A collection of similar tissues that performs a
specific function is an ________.
a.
organ
b.
organelle
c.
organism
d.
organ system
10. The body system responsible for structural
support and movement is the ________.
a.
cardiovascular system
b.
endocrine system
c.
muscular system
d.
skeletal system
11. Metabolism can be defined as the ________.
a.
adjustment by an organism to external or
internal changes
b.
process whereby all unspecialized cells
become specialized to perform distinct
functions
c.
process whereby new cells are formed to
replace worn-out cells
d.
sum of all chemical reactions in an organism
12. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is an important
molecule because it ________.
a.
is the result of catabolism
b.
release energy in uncontrolled bursts
c.
stores energy for use by body cells
d.
All of the above
13. Cancer cells can be characterized as “generic”
cells that perform no specialized body function.
Thus cancer cells lack ________.
a.
differentiation
b.
reproduction
c.
responsiveness
d.
both reproduction and responsiveness
14. Humans have the most urgent need for a
continuous supply of ________.
a.
food
b.
nitrogen
c.
oxygen
d.
water
15. Which of the following statements about nutrients
is true?
a.
All classes of nutrients are essential to human
survival.
b.
Because the body cannot store any
micronutrients, they need to be consumed
nearly every day.
c.
Carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are
micronutrients.
d.
Macronutrients are vitamins and minerals.
16. C.J. is stuck in their car during a bitterly cold
blizzard. Their body responds to the cold by
________.
a.
increasing the blood to the hands and feet
b.
becoming lethargic to conserve heat
c.
breaking down stored energy
d.
significantly increasing blood oxygen levels
17. After you eat lunch, nerve cells in your stomach
respond to the distension (the stimulus) resulting
from the food. They relay this information to
________.
a.
a control center
b.
a set point
c.
effectors
d.
sensors
18. Stimulation of the heat-loss center causes
________.
a.
blood vessels in the skin to constrict
b.
breathing to become slow and shallow
c.
sweat glands to increase their output
d.
All of the above
1 • Review Questions
35
19. Which of the following is an example of a normal
physiologic process that uses a positive feedback
loop?
a.
blood pressure regulation
b.
childbirth
c.
regulation of fluid balance
d.
temperature regulation
20. What is the position of the body when it is in the
“normal anatomical position?”
a.
The person is prone with upper limbs,
including palms, touching sides and lower
limbs touching at sides.
b.
The person is standing facing the observer,
with upper limbs extended out at a ninety-
degree angle from the torso and lower limbs
in a wide stance with feet pointing laterally
c.
The person is supine with upper limbs,
including palms, touching sides and lower
limbs touching at sides.
d.
None of the above
21. To make a banana split, you halve a banana into
two long, thin, right and left sides along the
________.
a.
coronal plane
b.
longitudinal plane
c.
midsagittal plane
d.
transverse plane
22. The lumbar region is ________.
a.
inferior to the gluteal region
b.
inferior to the umbilical region
c.
superior to the cervical region
d.
superior to the popliteal region
23. The heart is within the ________.
a.
cranial cavity
b.
mediastinum
c.
posterior (dorsal) cavity
d.
All of the above
24. In 1901, Wilhelm Röntgen was the first person to
win the Nobel Prize for physics. For what discovery
did he win?
a.
nuclear physics
b.
radiopharmaceuticals
c.
the link between radiation and cancer
d.
X-rays
25. Which of the following imaging techniques would
be best to use to study the uptake of nutrients by
rapidly multiplying cancer cells?
a.
CT
b.
MRI
c.
PET
d.
ultrasonography
26. Which of the following imaging studies can be
used most safely during pregnancy?
a.
CT scans
b.
PET scans
c.
ultrasounds
d.
X-rays
27. What are two major disadvantages of MRI scans?
a.
release of radiation and poor quality images
b.
high cost and the need for shielding from the
magnetic signals
c.
can only view metabolically active tissues and
inadequate availability of equipment
d.
release of radiation and the need for a patient
to be confined to metal tube for up to 30
minutes
Critical Thinking Questions
28. Name at least three reasons to study anatomy and
physiology.
29. For whom would an appreciation of the structural
characteristics of the human heart come more
easily: an alien who lands on Earth, abducts a
human, and dissects his heart, or an anatomy and
physiology student performing a dissection of the
heart on her very first day of class? Why?
30. Name the six levels of organization of the human
body.
31. The and the testes are a part of which body
system? Can these organs be members of more
than one organ system? Why or why not?
32. Explain why the smell of smoke when you are
sitting at a campfire does not trigger alarm, but
the smell of smoke in your residence hall does.
33. Identify three different ways that growth can
occur in the human body.
34. When you open a bottle of sparkling water, the
carbon dioxide gas in the bottle form bubbles. If
the bottle is left open, the water will eventually
“go flat.” Explain these phenomena in terms of
atmospheric pressure.
35. On his midsummer trek through the desert, Josh
ran out of water. Why is this particularly
dangerous?
36
1 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
36. Identify the four components of a negative
feedback loop and explain what would happen if
secretion of a body chemical controlled by a
negative feedback system became too great.
37. What regulatory processes would your body use if
you were trapped by a blizzard in an unheated,
uninsulated cabin in the woods?
38. In which direction would an MRI scanner move to
produce sequential images of the body in the
frontal plane, and in which direction would an MRI
scanner move to produce sequential images of the
body in the sagittal plane?
39. If a bullet were to penetrate a lung, which three
anterior thoracic body cavities would it enter, and
which layer of the serous membrane would it
encounter first?
40. Which medical imaging technique is most
dangerous to use repeatedly, and why?
41. Explain why ultrasound imaging is the technique
of choice for studying fetal growth and
development.
1 • Critical Thinking Questions
37
38
1 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2
The Chemical Level of Organization
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the fundamental composition of matter
•
Identify the three subatomic particles
•
Identify the four most abundant elements in the body
•
Explain the relationship between an atom’s number of electrons and its relative stability
•
Distinguish between ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and hydrogen bonds
•
Explain how energy is invested, stored, and released via chemical reactions, particularly those reactions that
are critical to life
•
Explain the importance of the inorganic compounds that contribute to life, such as water, salts, acids, and
bases
•
Compare and contrast the four important classes of organic (carbon-based) compounds—proteins,
carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids—according to their composition and functional importance to human
life
The smallest, most fundamental material components of the human body are basic chemical
elements. In fact, chemicals called nucleotide bases are the foundation of the genetic code with the instructions on
how to build and maintain the human body from conception through old age. There are about three billion of these
base pairs in human DNA.
Human chemistry includes organic molecules (carbon-based) and biochemicals (those produced by the body).
Human chemistry also includes elements. In fact, life cannot exist without many of the elements that are part of the
earth. All of the elements that contribute to chemical reactions, to the transformation of energy, and to electrical
activity and muscle contraction—elements that include phosphorus, carbon, sodium, and calcium, to name a
few—originated in stars.
These elements, in turn, can form both the inorganic and organic chemical compounds important to life, including,
for example, water, glucose, and proteins. This chapter begins by examining elements and how the structures of
Figure 2.1
Human DNA Human DNA is described as a double helix that resembles a molecular spiral staircase. In humans the DNA is
organized into 46 chromosomes.
atoms, the basic units of matter, determine the characteristics of elements by the number of protons, neutrons, and
electrons in the atoms. The chapter then builds the framework of life from there.
2.1 Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the relationships between matter, mass, elements, compounds, atoms, and subatomic particles
•
Distinguish between atomic number and mass number
•
Identify the key distinction between isotopes of the same element
•
Explain how electrons occupy electron shells and their contribution to an atom’s relative stability
The substance of the universe—from a grain of sand to a star—is called matter. Scientists define matter as anything
that occupies space and has mass. An object’s mass and its weight are related concepts, but not quite the same. An
object’s mass is the amount of matter contained in the object, and the object’s mass is the same whether that object
is on Earth or in the zero-gravity environment of outer space. An object’s weight, on the other hand, is its mass as
affected by the pull of gravity. Where gravity strongly pulls on an object’s mass its weight is greater than it is where
gravity is less strong. An object of a certain mass weighs less on the moon, for example, than it does on Earth
because the gravity of the moon is less than that of Earth. In other words, weight is variable, and is influenced by
gravity. A piece of cheese that weighs a pound on Earth weighs only a few ounces on the moon.
Elements and Compounds
All matter in the natural world is composed of one or more of the 92 fundamental substances called elements. An
element is a pure substance that is distinguished from all other matter by the fact that it cannot be created or
broken down by ordinary chemical means. While your body can assemble many of the chemical compounds needed
for life from their constituent elements, it cannot make elements. They must come from the environment. A familiar
example of an element that you must take in is calcium (Ca). Calcium is essential to the human body; it is absorbed
and used for a number of processes, including strengthening bones. When you consume dairy products your
digestive system breaks down the food into components small enough to cross into the bloodstream. Among these
is calcium, which, because it is an element, cannot be broken down further. The elemental calcium in cheese,
therefore, is the same as the calcium that forms your bones. Some other elements you might be familiar with are
oxygen, sodium, and iron. The elements in the human body are shown in Figure 2.2, beginning with the most
abundant: oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N). Each element’s name can be replaced by a one- or
two-letter symbol; you will become familiar with some of these during this course. All the elements in your body are
derived from the foods you eat and the air you breathe.
FIGURE 2.2
Elements of the Human Body
The main elements that compose the human body are shown from most abundant to least
abundant.
40
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
In nature, elements rarely occur alone. Instead, they combine to form compounds. A compound is a substance
composed of two or more elements joined by chemical bonds. For example, the compound glucose is an important
body fuel. It is always composed of the same three elements: carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Moreover, the
elements that make up any given compound always occur in the same relative amounts. In glucose, there are
always six carbon and six oxygen units for every twelve hydrogen units. But what, exactly, are these “units” of
elements?
Atoms and Subatomic Particles
An atom is the smallest quantity of an element that retains the unique properties of that element. In other words, an
atom of hydrogen is a unit of hydrogen—the smallest amount of hydrogen that can exist. As you might guess, atoms
are almost unfathomably small. The period at the end of this sentence is millions of atoms wide.
Atomic Structure and Energy
Atoms are made up of even smaller subatomic particles, three types of which are important: the proton, neutron,
and electron. The number of positively-charged protons and non-charged (“neutral”) neutrons, gives mass to the
atom, and the number of protons determines the element. The number of negatively-charged electrons that “spin”
around the nucleus at close to the speed of light equals the number of protons. An electron has about 1/2000th the
mass of a proton or neutron.
Figure 2.3 shows two models that can help you imagine the structure of an atom—in this case, helium (He). In the
planetary model, helium’s two electrons are shown circling the nucleus in a fixed orbit depicted as a ring. Although
this model is helpful in visualizing atomic structure, in reality, electrons do not travel in fixed orbits, but whiz around
the nucleus erratically in a so-called electron cloud.
FIGURE 2.3
Two Models of Atomic Structure
(a) In the planetary model, the electrons of helium are shown in fixed orbits, depicted as
rings, at a precise distance from the nucleus, somewhat like planets orbiting the sun. (b) In the electron cloud model, the electrons of
helium are shown in the variety of locations they would have at different distances from the nucleus over time.
An atom’s protons and electrons carry electrical charges. Protons, with their positive charge, are designated p+.
Electrons, which have a negative charge, are designated e–. An atom’s neutrons have no charge: they are electrically
2.1 • Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
41
neutral. Just as a magnet sticks to a steel refrigerator because their opposite charges attract, the positively charged
protons attract the negatively charged electrons. This mutual attraction gives the atom some structural stability. The
attraction by the positively charged nucleus helps keep electrons from straying far. The number of protons and
electrons within a neutral atom are equal, thus, the atom’s overall charge is balanced.
Atomic Number and Mass Number
An atom of carbon is unique to carbon, but a proton of carbon is not. One proton is the same as another, whether it is
found in an atom of carbon, sodium (Na), or iron (Fe). The same is true for neutrons and electrons. So, what gives an
element its distinctive properties—what makes carbon so different from sodium or iron? The answer is the unique
quantity of protons each contains. Carbon by definition is an element whose atoms contain six protons. No other
element has exactly six protons in its atoms. Moreover, all atoms of carbon, whether found in your liver or in a lump
of coal, contain six protons. Thus, the atomic number, which is the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom,
identifies the element. Because an atom usually has the same number of electrons as protons, the atomic number
identifies the usual number of electrons as well.
In their most common form, many elements also contain the same number of neutrons as protons. The most
common form of carbon, for example, has six neutrons as well as six protons, for a total of 12 subatomic particles in
its nucleus. An element’s mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus. So the
most common form of carbon’s mass number is 12. (Electrons have so little mass that they do not appreciably
contribute to the mass of an atom.) Carbon is a relatively light element. Uranium (U), in contrast, has a mass number
of 238 and is referred to as a heavy metal. Its atomic number is 92 (it has 92 protons) but it contains 146 neutrons;
it has the most mass of all the naturally occurring elements.
The periodic table of the elements, shown in Figure 2.4, is a chart identifying the 92 elements found in nature, as
well as several larger, unstable elements discovered experimentally. The elements are arranged in order of their
atomic number, with hydrogen and helium at the top of the table, and the more massive elements below. The
periodic table is a useful device because for each element, it identifies the chemical symbol, the atomic number, and
the mass number, while organizing elements according to their propensity to react with other elements. The number
of protons and electrons in an element are equal. The number of protons and neutrons may be equal for some
elements, but are not equal for all.
42
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.4
The Periodic Table of the Elements
(credit: R.A. Dragoset, A. Musgrove, C.W. Clark, W.C. Martin)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/ptable) to view the periodic table. In the periodic table of the elements,
elements in a single column have the same number of electrons that can participate in a chemical reaction. These
electrons are known as “valence electrons.” For example, the elements in the first column all have a single valence
electron, an electron that can be “donated” in a chemical reaction with another atom. What is the meaning of a mass
number shown in parentheses?
Isotopes
Although each element has a unique number of protons, it can exist as different isotopes. An isotope is one of the
different forms of an element, distinguished from one another by different numbers of neutrons. The standard
isotope of carbon is 12C, commonly called carbon twelve. 12C has six protons and six neutrons, for a mass number of
twelve. All of the isotopes of carbon have the same number of protons; therefore, 13C has seven neutrons, and 14C
has eight neutrons. The different isotopes of an element can also be indicated with the mass number hyphenated
(for example, C-12 instead of 12C). Hydrogen has three common isotopes, shown in Figure 2.5.
2.1 • Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
43
FIGURE 2.5
Isotopes of Hydrogen
Protium, designated 1H, has one proton and no neutrons. It is by far the most abundant isotope of
hydrogen in nature. Deuterium, designated 2H, has one proton and one neutron. Tritium, designated 3H, has two neutrons.
An isotope that contains more than the usual number of neutrons is referred to as a heavy isotope. An example is
14C. Heavy isotopes tend to be unstable, and unstable isotopes are radioactive. A radioactive isotope is an isotope
whose nucleus readily decays, giving off subatomic particles and electromagnetic energy. Different radioactive
isotopes (also called radioisotopes) differ in their half-life, the time it takes for half of any size sample of an isotope
to decay. For example, the half-life of tritium—a radioisotope of hydrogen—is about 12 years, indicating it takes 12
years for half of the tritium nuclei in a sample to decay. Excessive exposure to radioactive isotopes can damage
human cells and even cause cancer and birth defects, but when exposure is controlled, some radioactive isotopes
can be useful in medicine. For more information, see the Career Connections.
CAREER CONNECTION
Interventional Radiologist
The controlled use of radioisotopes has advanced medical diagnosis and treatment of disease. Interventional
radiologists are physicians who treat disease by using minimally invasive techniques involving radiation. Many
conditions that could once only be treated with a lengthy and traumatic operation can now be treated non-
surgically, reducing the cost, pain, length of hospital stay, and recovery time for patients. For example, in the past,
the only options for a patient with one or more tumors in the liver were surgery and chemotherapy (the
administration of drugs to treat cancer). Some liver tumors, however, are difficult to access surgically, and others
could require the surgeon to remove too much of the liver. Moreover, chemotherapy is highly toxic to the liver, and
certain tumors do not respond well to it anyway. In some such cases, an interventional radiologist can treat the
tumors by disrupting their blood supply, which they need if they are to continue to grow. In this procedure, called
radioembolization, the radiologist accesses the liver with a fine needle, threaded through one of the patient’s blood
vessels. The radiologist then inserts tiny radioactive “seeds” into the blood vessels that supply the tumors. In the
days and weeks following the procedure, the radiation emitted from the seeds destroys the vessels and directly kills
the tumor cells in the vicinity of the treatment.
Radioisotopes emit subatomic particles that can be detected and tracked by imaging technologies. One of the most
advanced uses of radioisotopes in medicine is the positron emission tomography (PET) scanner, which detects the
activity in the body of a very small injection of radioactive glucose, the simple sugar that cells use for energy. The
PET camera reveals to the medical team which of the patient’s tissues are taking up the most glucose. Thus, the
most metabolically active tissues show up as bright “hot spots” on the images (Figure 2.6). PET can reveal some
cancerous masses because cancer cells consume glucose at a high rate to fuel their rapid reproduction.
44
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.6
PET Scan
PET highlights areas in the body where there is relatively high glucose use, which is characteristic of cancerous
tissue. This PET scan shows sites of the spread of a large primary tumor to other sites.
The Behavior of Electrons
In the human body, atoms do not exist as independent entities. Rather, they are constantly reacting with other
atoms to form and to break down more complex substances. To fully understand anatomy and physiology you must
grasp how atoms participate in such reactions. The key is understanding the behavior of electrons.
Although electrons do not follow rigid orbits a set distance away from the atom’s nucleus, they do tend to stay
within certain regions of space called electron shells. An electron shell is a layer of electrons that encircle the
nucleus at a distinct energy level.
The atoms of the elements found in the human body have from one to five electron shells, and all electron shells
hold eight electrons except the first shell, which can only hold two. This configuration of electron shells is the same
for all atoms. The precise number of shells depends on the number of electrons in the atom. Hydrogen and helium
have just one and two electrons, respectively. If you take a look at the periodic table of the elements, you will notice
that hydrogen and helium are placed alone on either sides of the top row; they are the only elements that have just
one electron shell (Figure 2.7). A second shell is necessary to hold the electrons in all elements larger than hydrogen
and helium.
Lithium (Li), whose atomic number is 3, has three electrons. Two of these fill the first electron shell, and the third
spills over into a second shell. The second electron shell can accommodate as many as eight electrons. Carbon, with
its six electrons, entirely fills its first shell, and half-fills its second. With ten electrons, neon (Ne) entirely fills its two
electron shells. Again, a look at the periodic table reveals that all of the elements in the second row, from lithium to
neon, have just two electron shells. Atoms with more than ten electrons require more than two shells. These
elements occupy the third and subsequent rows of the periodic table.
2.1 • Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
45
FIGURE 2.7
Electron Shells
Electrons orbit the atomic nucleus at distinct levels of energy called electron shells. (a) With one electron,
hydrogen only half-fills its electron shell. Helium also has a single shell, but its two electrons completely fill it. (b) The electrons of carbon
completely fill its first electron shell, but only half-fills its second. (c) Neon, an element that does not occur in the body, has 10 electrons,
filling both of its electron shells.
The factor that most strongly governs the tendency of an atom to participate in chemical reactions is the number of
electrons in its valence shell. A valence shell is an atom’s outermost electron shell. If the valence shell is full, the
atom is stable; meaning its electrons are unlikely to be pulled away from the nucleus by the electrical charge of
other atoms. If the valence shell is not full, the atom is reactive; meaning it will tend to react with other atoms in
ways that make the valence shell full. Consider hydrogen, with its one electron only half-filling its valence shell. This
single electron is likely to be drawn into relationships with the atoms of other elements, so that hydrogen’s single
valence shell can be stabilized.
All atoms (except hydrogen and helium with their single electron shells) are most stable when there are exactly
eight electrons in their valence shell. This principle is referred to as the octet rule, and it states that an atom will give
up, gain, or share electrons with another atom so that it ends up with eight electrons in its own valence shell. For
example, oxygen, with six electrons in its valence shell, is likely to react with other atoms in a way that results in the
addition of two electrons to oxygen’s valence shell, bringing the number to eight. When two hydrogen atoms each
share their single electron with oxygen, covalent bonds are formed, resulting in a molecule of water, H2O.
In nature, atoms of one element tend to join with atoms of other elements in characteristic ways. For example,
carbon commonly fills its valence shell by linking up with four atoms of hydrogen. In so doing, the two elements
form the simplest of organic molecules, methane, which also is one of the most abundant and stable carbon-
containing compounds on Earth. As stated above, another example is water; oxygen needs two electrons to fill its
valence shell. It commonly interacts with two atoms of hydrogen, forming H2O. Incidentally, the name “hydrogen”
reflects its contribution to water (hydro- = “water”; -gen = “maker”). Thus, hydrogen is the “water maker.”
46
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 Chemical Bonds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the relationship between molecules and compounds
•
Distinguish between ions, cations, and anions
•
Identify the key difference between ionic and covalent bonds
•
Distinguish between nonpolar and polar covalent bonds
•
Explain how water molecules link via hydrogen bonds
Atoms separated by a great distance cannot link; rather, they must come close enough for the electrons in their
valence shells to interact. But do atoms ever actually touch one another? Most physicists would say no, because the
negatively charged electrons in their valence shells repel one another. No force within the human body—or
anywhere in the natural world—is strong enough to overcome this electrical repulsion. So when you read about
atoms linking together or colliding, bear in mind that the atoms are not merging in a physical sense.
Instead, atoms link by forming a chemical bond. A bond is a weak or strong electrical attraction that holds atoms in
the same vicinity. The new grouping is typically more stable—less likely to react again—than its component atoms
were when they were separate. A more or less stable grouping of two or more atoms held together by chemical
bonds is called a molecule. The bonded atoms may be of the same element, as in the case of H2, which is called
molecular hydrogen or hydrogen gas. When a molecule is made up of two or more atoms of different elements, it is
called a chemical compound. Thus, a unit of water, or H2O, is a compound, as is a single molecule of the gas
methane, or CH4.
Three types of chemical bonds are important in human physiology, because they hold together substances that are
used by the body for critical aspects of homeostasis, signaling, and energy production, to name just a few important
processes. These are ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and hydrogen bonds.
Ions and Ionic Bonds
Recall that an atom typically has the same number of positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons.
As long as this situation remains, the atom is electrically neutral. But when an atom participates in a chemical
reaction that results in the donation or acceptance of one or more electrons, the atom will then become positively or
negatively charged. This happens frequently for most atoms in order to have a full valence shell, as described
previously. This can happen either by gaining electrons to fill a shell that is more than half-full, or by giving away
electrons to empty a shell that is less than half-full, thereby leaving the next smaller electron shell as the new, full,
valence shell. An atom that has an electrical charge—whether positive or negative—is an ion.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/electenergy) to learn about electrical energy and the attraction/repulsion of
charges. What happens to the charged electroscope when a conductor is moved between its plastic sheets, and
why?
Potassium (K), for instance, is an important element in all body cells. Its atomic number is 19. It has just one
electron in its valence shell. This characteristic makes potassium highly likely to participate in chemical reactions in
which it donates one electron. (It is easier for potassium to donate one electron than to gain seven electrons.) The
loss will cause the positive charge of potassium’s protons to be more influential than the negative charge of
potassium’s electrons. In other words, the resulting potassium ion will be slightly positive. A potassium ion is
written K+, indicating that it has lost a single electron. A positively charged ion is known as a cation.
Now consider fluorine (F), a component of bones and teeth. Its atomic number is nine, and it has seven electrons in
its valence shell. Thus, it is highly likely to bond with other atoms in such a way that fluorine accepts one electron (it
is easier for fluorine to gain one electron than to donate seven electrons). When it does, its electrons will outnumber
its protons by one, and it will have an overall negative charge. The ionized form of fluorine is called fluoride, and is
written as F–. A negatively charged ion is known as an anion.
2.2 • Chemical Bonds
47
Atoms that have more than one electron to donate or accept will end up with stronger positive or negative charges.
A cation that has donated two electrons has a net charge of +2. Using magnesium (Mg) as an example, this can be
written Mg++ or Mg2+. An anion that has accepted two electrons has a net charge of –2. The ionic form of selenium
(Se), for example, is typically written Se2–.
The opposite charges of cations and anions exert a moderately strong mutual attraction that keeps the atoms in
close proximity forming an ionic bond. An ionic bond is an ongoing, close association between ions of opposite
charge. The table salt you sprinkle on your food owes its existence to ionic bonding. As shown in Figure 2.8, sodium
commonly donates an electron to chlorine, becoming the cation Na+. When chlorine accepts the electron, it
becomes the chloride anion, Cl–. With their opposing charges, these two ions strongly attract each other.
FIGURE 2.8
Ionic Bonding
(a) Sodium readily donates the solitary electron in its valence shell to chlorine, which needs only one
electron to have a full valence shell. (b) The opposite electrical charges of the resulting sodium cation and chloride anion result in the
formation of a bond of attraction called an ionic bond. (c) The attraction of many sodium and chloride ions results in the formation of large
groupings called crystals.
Water is an essential component of life because it is able to break the ionic bonds in salts to free the ions. In fact, in
48
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
biological fluids, most individual atoms exist as ions. These dissolved ions produce electrical charges within the
body. The behavior of these ions produces the tracings of heart and brain function observed as waves on an
electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG) or an electroencephalogram (EEG). The electrical activity that derives from the
interactions of the charged ions is why they are also called electrolytes.
Covalent Bonds
Unlike ionic bonds formed by the attraction between a cation’s positive charge and an anion’s negative charge,
molecules formed by a covalent bond share electrons in a mutually stabilizing relationship. Like next-door
neighbors whose kids hang out first at one home and then at the other, the atoms do not lose or gain electrons
permanently. Instead, the electrons move back and forth between the elements. Because of the close sharing of
pairs of electrons (one electron from each of two atoms), covalent bonds are stronger than ionic bonds.
Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
Figure 2.9 shows several common types of covalent bonds. Notice that the two covalently bonded atoms typically
share just one or two electron pairs, though larger sharings are possible. The important concept to take from this is
that in covalent bonds, electrons in the two atoms' overlapping atomic orbitals are shared to fill the valence shells of
both atoms, ultimately stabilizing both of the atoms involved. In a single covalent bond, a single electron pair is
shared between two atoms, while in a double covalent bond, two pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms.
There even are triple covalent bonds, where three electron pairs are shared between two atoms.
FIGURE 2.9
Covalent Bonding
You can see that the covalent bonds shown in Figure 2.9 are balanced. The sharing of the negative electrons is
relatively equal, as is the electrical pull of the positive protons in the nucleus of the atoms involved. This is why
covalently bonded molecules that are electrically balanced in this way are described as nonpolar; that is, no region
of the molecule is either more positive or more negative than any other.
Polar Covalent Bonds
Groups of legislators with completely opposite views on a particular issue are often described as “polarized” by
news writers. In chemistry, a polar molecule is a molecule that contains regions that have opposite electrical
charges. Polar molecules occur when atoms share electrons unequally, in polar covalent bonds.
2.2 • Chemical Bonds
49
The most familiar example of a polar molecule is water (Figure 2.10). The molecule has three parts: one atom of
oxygen, the nucleus of which contains eight protons, and two hydrogen atoms, whose nuclei each contain only one
proton. Because every proton exerts an identical positive charge, a nucleus that contains eight protons exerts a
charge eight times greater than a nucleus that contains one proton. This means that the negatively charged
electrons present in the water molecule are more strongly attracted to the oxygen nucleus than to the hydrogen
nuclei. Each hydrogen atom’s single negative electron therefore migrates toward the oxygen atom, making the
oxygen end of their bond slightly more negative than the hydrogen end of their bond.
FIGURE 2.10
Polar Covalent Bonds in a Water Molecule
What is true for the bonds is true for the water molecule as a whole; that is, the oxygen region has a slightly negative
charge and the regions of the hydrogen atoms have a slightly positive charge. These charges are often referred to as
“partial charges” because the strength of the charge is less than one full electron, as would occur in an ionic bond.
As shown in Figure 2.10, regions of weak polarity are indicated with the Greek letter delta (δ) and a plus (+) or minus
(–) sign.
Even though a single water molecule is unimaginably tiny, it has mass, and the opposing electrical charges on the
molecule pull that mass in such a way that it creates a shape somewhat like a triangular tent (see Figure 2.10b).
This dipole, with the positive charges at one end formed by the hydrogen atoms at the “bottom” of the tent and the
negative charge at the opposite end (the oxygen atom at the “top” of the tent) makes the charged regions highly
likely to interact with charged regions of other polar molecules. For human physiology, the resulting bond is one of
the most important formed by water—the hydrogen bond.
Hydrogen Bonds
A hydrogen bond is formed when a weakly positive hydrogen atom already bonded to one electronegative atom (for
example, the oxygen in the water molecule) is attracted to another electronegative atom from another molecule. In
other words, hydrogen bonds always include hydrogen that is already part of a polar molecule.
The most common example of hydrogen bonding in the natural world occurs between molecules of water. It
happens before your eyes whenever two raindrops merge into a larger bead, or a creek spills into a river. Hydrogen
bonding occurs because the weakly negative oxygen atom in one water molecule is attracted to the weakly positive
50
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
hydrogen atoms of two other water molecules (Figure 2.11).
FIGURE 2.11
Hydrogen Bonds between Water Molecules
Notice that the bonds occur between the weakly positive charge on the
hydrogen atoms and the weakly negative charge on the oxygen atoms. Hydrogen bonds are relatively weak, and therefore are indicated with
a dotted (rather than a solid) line.
Water molecules also strongly attract other types of charged molecules as well as ions. This explains why “table
salt,” for example, actually is a molecule called a “salt” in chemistry, which consists of equal numbers of positively-
charged sodium (Na+) and negatively-charged chloride (Cl–), dissolves so readily in water, in this case forming
dipole-ion bonds between the water and the electrically-charged ions (electrolytes). Water molecules also repel
molecules with nonpolar covalent bonds, like fats, lipids, and oils. You can demonstrate this with a simple kitchen
experiment: pour a teaspoon of vegetable oil, a compound formed by nonpolar covalent bonds, into a glass of water.
Instead of instantly dissolving in the water, the oil forms a distinct bead because the polar water molecules repel the
nonpolar oil.
2.3 Chemical Reactions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish between kinetic and potential energy, and between exergonic and endergonic chemical reactions
•
Identify four forms of energy important in human functioning
•
Describe the three basic types of chemical reactions
•
Identify several factors influencing the rate of chemical reactions
One characteristic of a living organism is metabolism, which is the sum total of all of the chemical reactions that go
on to maintain that organism’s health and life. The bonding processes you have learned thus far are anabolic
chemical reactions; that is, they form larger molecules from smaller molecules or atoms. But recall that metabolism
can proceed in another direction: in catabolic chemical reactions, bonds between components of larger molecules
break, releasing smaller molecules or atoms. Both types of reaction involve exchanges not only of matter, but of
energy.
The Role of Energy in Chemical Reactions
Chemical reactions require a sufficient amount of energy to cause the matter to collide with enough precision and
force that old chemical bonds can be broken and new ones formed. In general, kinetic energy is the form of energy
powering any type of matter in motion. Imagine you are building a brick wall. The energy it takes to lift and place one
brick atop another is kinetic energy—the energy matter possesses because of its motion. Once the wall is in place, it
stores potential energy. Potential energy is the energy of position, or the energy matter possesses because of the
positioning or structure of its components. If the brick wall collapses, the stored potential energy is released as
kinetic energy as the bricks fall.
In the human body, potential energy is stored in the bonds between atoms and molecules. Chemical energy is the
form of potential energy in which energy is stored in chemical bonds. When those bonds are formed, chemical
energy is invested, and when they break, chemical energy is released. Notice that chemical energy, like all energy, is
neither created nor destroyed; rather, it is converted from one form to another. When you eat an energy bar before
heading out the door for a hike, the honey, nuts, and other foods the bar contains are broken down and rearranged
by your body into molecules that your muscle cells convert to kinetic energy.
2.3 • Chemical Reactions
51
Chemical reactions that release more energy than they absorb are characterized as exergonic. The catabolism of the
foods in your energy bar is an example. Some of the chemical energy stored in the bar is absorbed into molecules
your body uses for fuel, but some of it is released—for example, as heat. In contrast, chemical reactions that absorb
more energy than they release are endergonic. These reactions require energy input, and the resulting molecule
stores not only the chemical energy in the original components, but also the energy that fueled the reaction.
Because energy is neither created nor destroyed, where does the energy needed for endergonic reactions come
from? In many cases, it comes from exergonic reactions.
Forms of Energy Important in Human Functioning
You have already learned that chemical energy is absorbed, stored, and released by chemical bonds. In addition to
chemical energy, mechanical, radiant, and electrical energy are important in human functioning.
•
Mechanical energy, which is stored in physical systems such as machines, engines, or the human body, directly
powers the movement of matter. When you lift a brick into place on a wall, your muscles provide the mechanical
energy that moves the brick.
•
Radiant energy is energy emitted and transmitted as waves rather than matter. These waves vary in length from
long radio waves and microwaves to short gamma waves emitted from decaying atomic nuclei. The full
spectrum of radiant energy is referred to as the electromagnetic spectrum. The body uses the ultraviolet energy
of sunlight to convert a compound in skin cells to vitamin D, which is essential to human functioning. The human
eye evolved to see the wavelengths that comprise the colors of the rainbow, from red to violet, so that range in
the spectrum is called “visible light.”
•
Electrical energy, supplied by electrolytes in cells and body fluids, contributes to the voltage changes that help
transmit impulses in nerve and muscle cells.
Characteristics of Chemical Reactions
All chemical reactions begin with a reactant, the general term for the one or more substances that enter into the
reaction. Sodium and chloride ions, for example, are the reactants in the production of table salt. The one or more
substances produced by a chemical reaction are called the product.
In chemical reactions, the components of the reactants—the elements involved and the number of atoms of
each—are all present in the product(s). Similarly, there is nothing present in the products that are not present in the
reactants. This is because chemical reactions are governed by the law of conservation of mass, which states that
matter cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction.
Just as you can express mathematical calculations in equations such as 2 + 7 = 9, you can use chemical equations
to show how reactants become products. As in math, chemical equations proceed from left to right, but instead of
an equal sign, they employ an arrow or arrows indicating the direction in which the chemical reaction proceeds. For
example, the chemical reaction in which one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of hydrogen produce ammonia would
be written as
. Correspondingly, the breakdown of ammonia into its components would be written
as
Notice that, in the first example, a nitrogen (N) atom and three hydrogen (H) atoms bond to form a compound. This
anabolic reaction requires energy, which is then stored within the compound’s bonds. Such reactions are referred to
as synthesis reactions. A synthesis reaction is a chemical reaction that results in the synthesis (joining) of
components that were formerly separate (Figure 2.12a). Again, nitrogen and hydrogen are reactants in a synthesis
reaction that yields ammonia as the product. The general equation for a synthesis reaction is
52
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.12
The Three Fundamental Chemical Reactions
The atoms and molecules involved in the three fundamental chemical
reactions can be imagined as words.
In the second example, ammonia is catabolized into its smaller components, and the potential energy that had been
stored in its bonds is released. Such reactions are referred to as decomposition reactions. A decomposition
reaction is a chemical reaction that breaks down or “de-composes” something larger into its constituent parts (see
Figure 2.12b). The general equation for a decomposition reaction is:
.
An exchange reaction is a chemical reaction in which both synthesis and decomposition occur, chemical bonds are
both formed and broken, and chemical energy is absorbed, stored, and released (see Figure 2.12c). The simplest
form of an exchange reaction might be:
. Notice that, to produce these products, B and C had to
break apart in a decomposition reaction, whereas A and B had to bond in a synthesis reaction. A more complex
exchange reaction might be:
. Another example might be:
.
In theory, any chemical reaction can proceed in either direction under the right conditions. Reactants may
synthesize into a product that is later decomposed. Reversibility is also a quality of exchange reactions. For instance,
could then reverse to
. This reversibility of a chemical reaction is indicated
with a double arrow:
. Still, in the human body, many chemical reactions do proceed in a
predictable direction, either one way or the other. You can think of this more predictable path as the path of least
resistance because, typically, the alternate direction requires more energy.
Factors Influencing the Rate of Chemical Reactions
If you pour vinegar into baking soda, the reaction is instantaneous; the concoction will bubble and fizz. But many
chemical reactions take time. A variety of factors influence the rate of chemical reactions. This section, however, will
consider only the most important in human functioning.
Properties of the Reactants
If chemical reactions are to occur quickly, the atoms in the reactants have to have easy access to one another. Thus,
the greater the surface area of the reactants, the more readily they will interact. When you pop a cube of cheese into
your mouth, you chew it before you swallow it. Among other things, chewing increases the surface area of the food
so that digestive chemicals can more easily get at it. As a general rule, gases tend to react faster than liquids or
solids, again because it takes energy to separate particles of a substance, and gases by definition already have
space between their particles. Similarly, the larger the molecule, the greater the number of total bonds, so reactions
involving smaller molecules, with fewer total bonds, would be expected to proceed faster.
In addition, recall that some elements are more reactive than others. Reactions that involve highly reactive
elements like hydrogen proceed more quickly than reactions that involve less reactive elements. Reactions involving
stable elements like helium are not likely to happen at all.
Temperature
Nearly all chemical reactions occur at a faster rate at higher temperatures. Recall that kinetic energy is the energy of
matter in motion. The kinetic energy of subatomic particles increases in response to increases in thermal energy.
The higher the temperature, the faster the particles move, and the more likely they are to come in contact and react.
2.3 • Chemical Reactions
53
Concentration and Pressure
If just a few people are dancing at a club, they are unlikely to step on each other’s toes. But as more and more
people get up to dance—especially if the music is fast—collisions are likely to occur. It is the same with chemical
reactions: the more particles present within a given space, the more likely those particles are to bump into one
another. This means that chemists can speed up chemical reactions not only by increasing the concentration of
particles—the number of particles in the space—but also by decreasing the volume of the space, which would
correspondingly increase the pressure. If there were 100 dancers in that club, and the manager abruptly moved the
party to a room half the size, the concentration of the dancers would double in the new space, and the likelihood of
collisions would increase accordingly.
Enzymes and Other Catalysts
For two chemicals in nature to react with each other they first have to come into contact, and this occurs through
random collisions. Because heat helps increase the kinetic energy of atoms, ions, and molecules, it promotes their
collision. But in the body, extremely high heat—such as a very high fever—can damage body cells and be life-
threatening. On the other hand, normal body temperature is not high enough to promote the chemical reactions that
sustain life. That is where catalysts come in.
In chemistry, a catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself undergoing any
change. You can think of a catalyst as a chemical change agent. They help increase the rate and force at which
atoms, ions, and molecules collide, thereby increasing the probability that their valence shell electrons will interact.
The most important catalysts in the human body are enzymes. An enzyme is a catalyst composed of protein or
ribonucleic acid (RNA), both of which will be discussed later in this chapter. Like all catalysts, enzymes work by
lowering the level of energy that needs to be invested in a chemical reaction. A chemical reaction’s activation
energy is the “threshold” level of energy needed to break the bonds in the reactants. Once those bonds are broken,
new arrangements can form. Without an enzyme to act as a catalyst, a much larger investment of energy is needed
to ignite a chemical reaction (Figure 2.13).
FIGURE 2.13
Enzymes
Enzymes decrease the activation energy required for a given chemical reaction to occur. (a) Without an enzyme,
the energy input needed for a reaction to begin is high. (b) With the help of an enzyme, less energy is needed for a reaction to begin.
Enzymes are critical to the body’s healthy functioning. They assist, for example, with the breakdown of food and its
conversion to energy. In fact, most of the chemical reactions in the body are facilitated by enzymes.
2.4 Inorganic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast inorganic and organic compounds
•
Identify the properties of water that make it essential to life
•
Explain the role of salts in body functioning
•
Distinguish between acids and bases, and explain their role in pH
•
Discuss the role of buffers in helping the body maintain pH homeostasis
54
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
The concepts you have learned so far in this chapter govern all forms of matter, and would work as a foundation for
geology as well as biology. This section of the chapter narrows the focus to the chemistry of human life; that is, the
compounds important for the body’s structure and function. In general, these compounds are either inorganic or
organic.
•
An inorganic compound is a substance that does not contain both carbon and hydrogen. A great many
inorganic compounds do contain hydrogen atoms, such as water (H2O) and the hydrochloric acid (HCl)
produced by your stomach. In contrast, only a handful of inorganic compounds contain carbon atoms. Carbon
dioxide (CO2) is one of the few examples.
•
An organic compound, then, is a substance that contains both carbon and hydrogen. Organic compounds are
synthesized via covalent bonds within living organisms, including the human body. Recall that carbon and
hydrogen are the second and third most abundant elements in your body. You will soon discover how these two
elements combine in the foods you eat, in the compounds that make up your body structure, and in the
chemicals that fuel your functioning.
The following section examines the three groups of inorganic compounds essential to life: water, salts, acids, and
bases. Organic compounds are covered later in the chapter.
Water
As much as 70 percent of an adult’s body weight is water. This water is contained both within the cells and between
the cells that make up tissues and organs. Its several roles make water indispensable to human functioning.
Water as a Lubricant and Cushion
Water is a major component of many of the body’s lubricating fluids. Just as oil lubricates the hinge on a door, water
in synovial fluid lubricates the actions of body joints, and water in pleural fluid helps the lungs expand and recoil
with breathing. Watery fluids help keep food flowing through the digestive tract, and ensure that the movement of
adjacent abdominal organs is friction free.
Water also protects cells and organs from physical trauma, cushioning the brain within the skull, for example, and
protecting the delicate nerve tissue of the eyes. Water cushions a developing fetus in the mother’s womb as well.
Water as a Heat Sink
A heat sink is a substance or object that absorbs and dissipates heat but does not experience a corresponding
increase in temperature. In the body, water absorbs the heat generated by chemical reactions without greatly
increasing in temperature. Moreover, when the environmental temperature soars, the water stored in the body helps
keep the body cool. This cooling effect happens as warm blood from the body’s core flows to the blood vessels just
under the skin and is transferred to the environment. At the same time, sweat glands release warm water in sweat.
As the water evaporates into the air, it carries away heat, and then the cooler blood from the periphery circulates
back to the body core.
Water as a Component of Liquid Mixtures
A mixture is a combination of two or more substances, each of which maintains its own chemical identity. In other
words, the constituent substances are not chemically bonded into a new, larger chemical compound. The concept is
easy to imagine if you think of powdery substances such as flour and sugar; when you stir them together in a bowl,
they obviously do not bond to form a new compound. The room air you breathe is a gaseous mixture, containing
three discrete elements—nitrogen, oxygen, and argon—and one compound, carbon dioxide. There are three types of
liquid mixtures, all of which contain water as a key component. These are solutions, colloids, and suspensions.
For cells in the body to survive, they must be kept moist in a water-based liquid called a solution. In chemistry, a
liquid solution consists of a solvent that dissolves a substance called a solute. An important characteristic of
solutions is that they are homogeneous; that is, the solute molecules are distributed evenly throughout the solution.
If you were to stir a teaspoon of sugar into a glass of water, the sugar would dissolve into sugar molecules separated
by water molecules. The ratio of sugar to water in the left side of the glass would be the same as the ratio of sugar to
water in the right side of the glass. If you were to add more sugar, the ratio of sugar to water would change, but the
distribution—provided you had stirred well—would still be even.
Water is considered the “universal solvent” and it is believed that life cannot exist without water because of this.
2.4 • Inorganic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
55
Water is certainly the most abundant solvent in the body; essentially all of the body’s chemical reactions occur
among compounds dissolved in water. Because water molecules are polar, with regions of positive and negative
electrical charge, water readily dissolves ionic compounds and polar covalent compounds. Such compounds are
referred to as hydrophilic, or “water-loving.” As mentioned above, sugar dissolves well in water. This is because
sugar molecules contain regions of hydrogen-oxygen polar bonds, making it hydrophilic. Nonpolar molecules, which
do not readily dissolve in water, are called hydrophobic, or “water-fearing.”
Concentrations of Solutes
Various mixtures of solutes and water are described in chemistry. The concentration of a given solute is the number
of particles of that solute in a given space (oxygen makes up about 21 percent of atmospheric air). In the
bloodstream of humans, glucose concentration is usually measured in milligram (mg) per deciliter (dL), and in a
healthy adult averages about 100 mg/dL. Another method of measuring the concentration of a solute is by its
molarity—which is moles (M) of the molecules per liter (L). The mole of an element is its atomic weight, while a mole
of a compound is the sum of the atomic weights of its components, called the molecular weight. An often-used
example is calculating a mole of glucose, with the chemical formula C6H12O6. Using the periodic table, the atomic
weight of carbon (C) is 12.011 grams (g), and there are six carbons in glucose, for a total atomic weight of 72.066 g.
Doing the same calculations for hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O), the molecular weight equals 180.156g (the “gram
molecular weight” of glucose). When water is added to make one liter of solution, you have one mole (1M) of
glucose. This is particularly useful in chemistry because of the relationship of moles to “Avogadro’s number.” A mole
of any solution has the same number of particles in it: 6.02 × 1023. Many substances in the bloodstream and other
tissue of the body are measured in thousandths of a mole, or millimoles (mM).
A colloid is a mixture that is somewhat like a heavy solution. The solute particles consist of tiny clumps of molecules
large enough to make the liquid mixture opaque (because the particles are large enough to scatter light). Familiar
examples of colloids are milk and cream. In the thyroid glands, the thyroid hormone is stored as a thick protein
mixture also called a colloid.
A suspension is a liquid mixture in which a heavier substance is suspended temporarily in a liquid, but over time,
settles out. This separation of particles from a suspension is called sedimentation. An example of sedimentation
occurs in the blood test that establishes sedimentation rate, or sed rate. The test measures how quickly red blood
cells in a test tube settle out of the watery portion of blood (known as plasma) over a set period of time. Rapid
sedimentation of blood cells does not normally happen in the healthy body, but aspects of certain diseases can
cause blood cells to clump together, and these heavy clumps of blood cells settle to the bottom of the test tube
more quickly than do normal blood cells.
The Role of Water in Chemical Reactions
Two types of chemical reactions involve the creation or the consumption of water: dehydration synthesis and
hydrolysis.
•
In dehydration synthesis, one reactant gives up an atom of hydrogen and another reactant gives up a hydroxyl
group (OH) in the synthesis of a new product. In the formation of their covalent bond, a molecule of water is
released as a byproduct (Figure 2.14). This is also sometimes referred to as a condensation reaction.
•
In hydrolysis, a molecule of water disrupts a compound, breaking its bonds. The water is itself split into H and
OH. One portion of the severed compound then bonds with the hydrogen atom, and the other portion bonds
with the hydroxyl group.
These reactions are reversible, and play an important role in the chemistry of organic compounds (which will be
discussed shortly).
56
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.14
Dehydration Synthesis and Hydrolysis
Monomers, the basic units for building larger molecules, form polymers (two or
more chemically-bonded monomers). (a) In dehydration synthesis, two monomers are covalently bonded in a reaction in which one gives
up a hydroxyl group and the other a hydrogen atom. A molecule of water is released as a byproduct during dehydration reactions. (b) In
hydrolysis, the covalent bond between two monomers is split by the addition of a hydrogen atom to one and a hydroxyl group to the other,
which requires the contribution of one molecule of water.
Salts
Recall that salts are formed when ions form ionic bonds. In these reactions, one atom gives up one or more
electrons, and thus becomes positively charged, whereas the other accepts one or more electrons and becomes
negatively charged. You can now define a salt as a substance that, when dissolved in water, dissociates into ions
other than H+ or OH–. This fact is important in distinguishing salts from acids and bases, discussed next.
A typical salt, NaCl, dissociates completely in water (Figure 2.15). The positive and negative regions on the water
molecule (the hydrogen and oxygen ends respectively) attract the negative chloride and positive sodium ions,
pulling them away from each other. Again, whereas nonpolar and polar covalently bonded compounds break apart
into molecules in solution, salts dissociate into ions. These ions are electrolytes; they are capable of conducting an
electrical current in solution. This property is critical to the function of ions in transmitting nerve impulses and
prompting muscle contraction.
2.4 • Inorganic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
57
FIGURE 2.15
Dissociation of Sodium Chloride in Water
Notice that the crystals of sodium chloride dissociate not into molecules of
NaCl, but into Na+ cations and Cl– anions, each completely surrounded by water molecules.
Many other salts are important in the body. For example, bile salts produced by the liver help break apart dietary
fats, and calcium phosphate salts form the mineral portion of teeth and bones.
Acids and Bases
Acids and bases, like salts, dissociate in water into electrolytes. Acids and bases can very much change the
properties of the solutions in which they are dissolved.
Acids
An acid is a substance that releases hydrogen ions (H+) in solution (Figure 2.16a). Because an atom of hydrogen has
just one proton and one electron, a positively charged hydrogen ion is simply a proton. This solitary proton is highly
likely to participate in chemical reactions. Strong acids are compounds that release all of their H+ in solution; that is,
they ionize completely. Hydrochloric acid (HCl), which is released from cells in the lining of the stomach, is a strong
acid because it releases all of its H+ in the stomach’s watery environment. This strong acid aids in digestion and kills
ingested microbes. Weak acids do not ionize completely; that is, some of their hydrogen ions remain bonded within a
compound in solution. An example of a weak acid is vinegar, or acetic acid; it is called acetate after it gives up a
proton.
58
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.16
Acids and Bases
(a) In aqueous solution, an acid dissociates into hydrogen ions (H+) and anions. Nearly every molecule
of a strong acid dissociates, producing a high concentration of H+. (b) In aqueous solution, a base dissociates into hydroxyl ions (OH–) and
cations. Nearly every molecule of a strong base dissociates, producing a high concentration of OH–.
Bases
A base is a substance that releases hydroxyl ions (OH–) in solution, or one that accepts H+ already present in
solution (see Figure 2.16b). The hydroxyl ions (also known as hydroxide ions) or other basic substances combine
with H+ present to form a water molecule, thereby removing H+ and reducing the solution’s acidity. Strong bases
release most or all of their hydroxyl ions; weak bases release only some hydroxyl ions or absorb only a few H+. Food
mixed with hydrochloric acid from the stomach would burn the small intestine, the next portion of the digestive tract
after the stomach, if it were not for the release of bicarbonate (HCO3–), a weak base that attracts H+. Bicarbonate
accepts some of the H+ protons, thereby reducing the acidity of the solution.
The Concept of pH
The relative acidity or alkalinity of a solution can be indicated by its pH. A solution’s pH is the negative, base-10
logarithm of the hydrogen ion (H+) concentration of the solution. As an example, a pH 4 solution has an H+
concentration that is ten times greater than that of a pH 5 solution. That is, a solution with a pH of 4 is ten times
more acidic than a solution with a pH of 5. The concept of pH will begin to make more sense when you study the pH
scale, like that shown in Figure 2.17. The scale consists of a series of increments ranging from 0 to 14. A solution
with a pH of 7 is considered neutral—neither acidic nor basic. Pure water has a pH of 7. The lower the number below
7, the more acidic the solution, or the greater the concentration of H+. The concentration of hydrogen ions at each
pH value is 10 times different than the next pH. For instance, a pH value of 4 corresponds to a proton concentration
of 10–4 M, or 0.0001M, while a pH value of 5 corresponds to a proton concentration of 10–5 M, or 0.00001M. The
higher the number above 7, the more basic (alkaline) the solution, or the lower the concentration of H+. Human
urine, for example, is ten times more acidic than pure water, and HCl is 10,000,000 times more acidic than water.
2.4 • Inorganic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
59
FIGURE 2.17
The pH Scale
Buffers
The pH of human blood normally ranges from 7.35 to 7.45, although it is typically identified as pH 7.4. At this
slightly basic pH, blood can reduce the acidity resulting from the carbon dioxide (CO2) constantly being released into
the bloodstream by the trillions of cells in the body. Homeostatic mechanisms (along with exhaling CO2 while
breathing) normally keep the pH of blood within this narrow range. This is critical, because fluctuations—either too
acidic or too alkaline—can lead to life-threatening disorders.
All cells of the body depend on homeostatic regulation of acid–base balance at a pH of approximately 7.4. The body
therefore has several mechanisms for this regulation, involving breathing, the excretion of chemicals in urine, and
the internal release of chemicals collectively called buffers into body fluids. A buffer is a solution of a weak acid and
its conjugate base. A buffer can neutralize small amounts of acids or bases in body fluids. For example, if there is
even a slight decrease below 7.35 in the pH of a bodily fluid, the buffer in the fluid—in this case, acting as a weak
base—will bind the excess hydrogen ions. In contrast, if pH rises above 7.45, the buffer will act as a weak acid and
contribute hydrogen ions.
60
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Acids and Bases
Excessive acidity of the blood and other body fluids is known as acidosis. Common causes of acidosis are situations
and disorders that reduce the effectiveness of breathing, especially the person’s ability to exhale fully, which causes
a buildup of CO2 (and H+) in the bloodstream. Acidosis can also be caused by metabolic problems that reduce the
level or function of buffers that act as bases, or that promote the production of acids. For instance, with severe
diarrhea, too much bicarbonate can be lost from the body, allowing acids to build up in body fluids. In people with
poorly managed diabetes (ineffective regulation of blood sugar), acids called ketones are produced as a form of
body fuel. These can build up in the blood, causing a serious condition called diabetic ketoacidosis. Kidney failure,
liver failure, heart failure, cancer, and other disorders also can prompt metabolic acidosis.
In contrast, alkalosis is a condition in which the blood and other body fluids are too alkaline (basic). As with
acidosis, respiratory disorders are a major cause; however, in respiratory alkalosis, carbon dioxide levels fall too low.
Lung disease, aspirin overdose, shock, and ordinary anxiety can cause respiratory alkalosis, which reduces the
normal concentration of H+.
Metabolic alkalosis often results from prolonged, severe vomiting, which causes a loss of hydrogen and chloride ions
(as components of HCl). Medications also can prompt alkalosis. These include diuretics that cause the body to lose
potassium ions, as well as antacids when taken in excessive amounts, for instance by someone with persistent
heartburn or an ulcer.
2.5 Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify four types of organic molecules essential to human functioning
•
Explain the chemistry behind carbon’s affinity for covalently bonding in organic compounds
•
Provide examples of three types of carbohydrates, and identify the primary functions of carbohydrates in the
body
•
Discuss four types of lipids important in human functioning
•
Describe the structure of proteins, and discuss their importance to human functioning
•
Identify the building blocks of nucleic acids, and the roles of DNA, RNA, and ATP in human functioning
Organic compounds typically consist of groups of carbon atoms covalently bonded to hydrogen, usually oxygen, and
often other elements as well. They are found throughout the world, in soils and seas, commercial products, and
every cell of the human body. The four types most important to human structure and function are carbohydrates,
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Before exploring these compounds, you need to first understand the chemistry of
carbon.
The Chemistry of Carbon
What makes organic compounds ubiquitous is the chemistry of their carbon core. Recall that carbon atoms have four
electrons in their valence shell, and that the octet rule dictates that atoms tend to react in such a way as to
complete their valence shell with eight electrons. Carbon atoms do not complete their valence shells by donating or
accepting four electrons. Instead, they readily share electrons via covalent bonds.
Commonly, carbon atoms share with other carbon atoms, often forming a long carbon chain referred to as a carbon
skeleton. When they do share, however, they do not share all their electrons exclusively with each other. Rather,
carbon atoms tend to share electrons with a variety of other elements, one of which is always hydrogen. Carbon and
hydrogen groupings are called hydrocarbons. If you study the figures of organic compounds in the remainder of this
chapter, you will see several with chains of hydrocarbons in one region of the compound.
Many combinations are possible to fill carbon’s four “vacancies.” Carbon may share electrons with oxygen or
nitrogen or other atoms in a particular region of an organic compound. Moreover, the atoms to which carbon atoms
bond may also be part of a functional group. A functional group is a group of atoms linked by strong covalent bonds
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
61
and tending to function in chemical reactions as a single unit. You can think of functional groups as tightly knit
“cliques” whose members are unlikely to be parted. Five functional groups are important in human physiology;
these are the hydroxyl, carboxyl, amino, methyl and phosphate groups (Table 2.1).
Functional Groups Important in Human Physiology
Functional
group
Structural
formula
Importance
Hydroxyl
—O—H
Hydroxyl groups are polar. They are components of all four types of organic
compounds discussed in this chapter. They are involved in dehydration
synthesis and hydrolysis reactions.
Carboxyl
Carboxyl groups are found within fatty acids, amino acids, and many other
acids.
Amino
—N—H2
Amino groups are found within amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
Methyl
—C—H3
Methyl groups are found within amino acids.
Phosphate
—P—O42–
Phosphate groups are found within phospholipids and nucleotides.
TABLE 2.1
Carbon’s affinity for covalent bonding means that many distinct and relatively stable organic molecules nevertheless
readily form larger, more complex molecules. Any large molecule is referred to as macromolecule (macro- =
“large”), and the organic compounds in this section all fit this description. However, some macromolecules are
made up of several “copies” of single units called monomer (mono- = “one”; -mer = “part”). Like beads in a long
necklace, these monomers link by covalent bonds to form long polymers (poly- = “many”). There are many
examples of monomers and polymers among the organic compounds.
Monomers form polymers by engaging in dehydration synthesis (see Figure 2.14). As was noted earlier, this reaction
results in the release of a molecule of water. Each monomer contributes: One gives up a hydrogen atom and the
other gives up a hydroxyl group. Polymers are split into monomers by hydrolysis (-lysis = “rupture”). The bonds
between their monomers are broken, via the donation of a molecule of water, which contributes a hydrogen atom to
one monomer and a hydroxyl group to the other.
Carbohydrates
The term carbohydrate means “hydrated carbon.” Recall that the root hydro- indicates water. A carbohydrate is a
molecule composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; in most carbohydrates, hydrogen and oxygen are found in the
same two-to-one relative proportions they have in water. In fact, the chemical formula for a “generic” molecule of
carbohydrate is (CH2O)n.
Carbohydrates are referred to as saccharides, a word meaning “sugars.” Three forms are important in the body.
Monosaccharides are the monomers of carbohydrates. Disaccharides (di- = “two”) are made up of two monomers.
Polysaccharides are the polymers, and can consist of hundreds to thousands of monomers.
Monosaccharides
A monosaccharide is a monomer of carbohydrates. Five monosaccharides are important in the body. Three of these
are the hexose sugars, so called because they each contain six atoms of carbon. These are glucose, fructose, and
galactose, shown in Figure 2.18a. The remaining monosaccharides are the two pentose sugars, each of which
contains five atoms of carbon. They are ribose and deoxyribose, shown in Figure 2.18b.
62
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 2.18
Five Important Monosaccharides
Disaccharides
A disaccharide is a pair of monosaccharides. Disaccharides are formed via dehydration synthesis, and the bond
linking them is referred to as a glycosidic bond (glyco- = “sugar”). Three disaccharides (shown in Figure 2.19) are
important to humans. These are sucrose, commonly referred to as table sugar; lactose, or milk sugar; and maltose,
or malt sugar. As you can tell from their common names, you consume these in your diet; however, your body cannot
use them directly. Instead, in the digestive tract, they are split into their component monosaccharides via hydrolysis.
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
63
FIGURE 2.19
Three Important Disaccharides
All three important disaccharides form by dehydration synthesis.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/disaccharide) to observe the formation of a disaccharide. What happens
when water encounters a glycosidic bond?
Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides can contain a few to a thousand or more monosaccharides. Three are important to the body (Figure
2.20):
•
Starches are polymers of glucose. They occur in long chains called amylose or branched chains called
amylopectin, both of which are stored in plant-based foods and are relatively easy to digest.
64
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
•
Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose, but it is stored in the tissues of animals, especially in the muscles and
liver. It is not considered a dietary carbohydrate because very little glycogen remains in animal tissues after
slaughter; however, the human body stores excess glucose as glycogen, again, in the muscles and liver.
•
Cellulose, a polysaccharide that is the primary component of the cell wall of green plants, is the component of
plant food referred to as “fiber”. In humans, cellulose/fiber is not digestible; however, dietary fiber has many
health benefits. It helps you feel full so you eat less, it promotes a healthy digestive tract, and a diet high in fiber
is thought to reduce the risk of heart disease and possibly some forms of cancer.
FIGURE 2.20
Three Important Polysaccharides
Three important polysaccharides are starches, glycogen, and fiber.
Functions of Carbohydrates
The body obtains carbohydrates from plant-based foods. Grains, fruits, and legumes and other vegetables provide
most of the carbohydrate in the human diet, although lactose is found in dairy products.
Although most body cells can break down other organic compounds for fuel, all body cells can use glucose.
Moreover, nerve cells (neurons) in the brain, spinal cord, and through the peripheral nervous system, as well as red
blood cells, can use only glucose for fuel. In the breakdown of glucose for energy, molecules of adenosine
triphosphate, better known as ATP, are produced. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is composed of a ribose sugar, an
adenine base, and three phosphate groups. ATP releases free energy when its phosphate bonds are broken, and
thus supplies ready energy to the cell. More ATP is produced in the presence of oxygen (O2) than in pathways that do
not use oxygen. The overall reaction for the conversion of the energy in glucose to energy stored in ATP can be
written:
In addition to being a critical fuel source, carbohydrates are present in very small amounts in cells’ structure. For
instance, some carbohydrate molecules bind with proteins to produce glycoproteins, and others combine with lipids
to produce glycolipids, both of which are found in the membrane that encloses the contents of body cells.
Lipids
A lipid is one of a highly diverse group of compounds made up mostly of hydrocarbons. The few oxygen atoms they
contain are often at the periphery of the molecule. Their nonpolar hydrocarbons make all lipids hydrophobic. In
water, lipids do not form a true solution, but they may form an emulsion, which is the term for a mixture of solutions
that do not mix well.
Triglycerides
A triglyceride is one of the most common dietary lipid groups, and the type found most abundantly in body tissues.
This compound, which is commonly referred to as a fat, is formed from the synthesis of two types of molecules
(Figure 2.21):
•
A glycerol backbone at the core of triglycerides, consists of three carbon atoms.
•
Three fatty acids, long chains of hydrocarbons with a carboxyl group and a methyl group at opposite ends,
extend from each of the carbons of the glycerol.
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
65
FIGURE 2.21
Triglycerides
Triglycerides are composed of glycerol attached to three fatty acids via dehydration synthesis. Notice that
glycerol gives up a hydrogen atom, and the carboxyl groups on the fatty acids each give up a hydroxyl group.
Triglycerides form via dehydration synthesis. Glycerol gives up hydrogen atoms from its hydroxyl groups at each
bond, and the carboxyl group on each fatty acid chain gives up a hydroxyl group. A total of three water molecules are
thereby released.
Fatty acid chains that have no double carbon bonds anywhere along their length and therefore contain the maximum
number of hydrogen atoms are called saturated fatty acids. These straight, rigid chains pack tightly together and are
solid or semi-solid at room temperature (Figure 2.22a). Butter and lard are examples, as is the fat found on a steak
or in your own body. In contrast, fatty acids with one double carbon bond are kinked at that bond (Figure 2.22b).
These monounsaturated fatty acids are therefore unable to pack together tightly, and are liquid at room
temperature. Polyunsaturated fatty acids contain two or more double carbon bonds, and are also liquid at room
temperature. Plant oils such as olive oil typically contain both mono- and polyunsaturated fatty acids.
FIGURE 2.22
Fatty Acid Shapes
The level of saturation of a fatty acid affects its shape. (a) Saturated fatty acid chains are straight. (b)
Unsaturated fatty acid chains are kinked.
Whereas a diet high in saturated fatty acids increases the risk of heart disease, a diet high in unsaturated fatty acids
is thought to reduce the risk. This is especially true for the omega-3 unsaturated fatty acids found in cold-water fish
such as salmon. These fatty acids have their first double carbon bond at the third hydrocarbon from the methyl
group (referred to as the omega end of the molecule).
Finally, trans fatty acids found in some processed foods, including some stick and tub margarines, are thought to be
even more harmful to the heart and blood vessels than saturated fatty acids. Trans fats are created from
unsaturated fatty acids (such as corn oil) when chemically treated to produce partially hydrogenated fats.
As a group, triglycerides are a major fuel source for the body. When you are resting or asleep, a majority of the
energy used to keep you alive is derived from triglycerides stored in your fat (adipose) tissues. Triglycerides also fuel
long, slow physical activity such as gardening or hiking, and contribute a modest percentage of energy for vigorous
physical activity. Dietary fat also assists the absorption and transport of the nonpolar fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E,
and K. Additionally, stored body fat protects and cushions the body’s bones and internal organs, and acts as
insulation to retain body heat.
Fatty acids are also components of glycolipids, which are sugar-fat compounds found in the cell membrane.
Lipoproteins are compounds in which the hydrophobic triglycerides are packaged in protein envelopes for transport
66
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
in body fluids.
Phospholipids
As its name suggests, a phospholipid is a bond between the glycerol component of a lipid and a phosphorous
molecule. In fact, phospholipids are similar in structure to triglycerides. However, instead of having three fatty acids,
a phospholipid is generated from a diglyceride, a glycerol with just two fatty acid chains (Figure 2.23). The third
binding site on the glycerol is taken up by the phosphate group, which in turn is attached to a polar “head” region of
the molecule. Recall that triglycerides are nonpolar and hydrophobic. This still holds for the fatty acid portion of a
phospholipid compound. However, the head of a phospholipid contains charges on the phosphate groups, as well as
on the nitrogen atom. These charges make the phospholipid head hydrophilic. Therefore, phospholipids are said to
have hydrophobic tails, containing the neutral fatty acids, and hydrophilic heads, containing the charged phosphate
groups and nitrogen atom.
FIGURE 2.23
Other Important Lipids
(a) Phospholipids are composed of two fatty acids, glycerol, and a phosphate group. (b) Sterols
are ring-shaped lipids. Shown here is cholesterol. (c) Prostaglandins are derived from unsaturated fatty acids. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
includes hydroxyl and carboxyl groups.
Steroids
A steroid compound (referred to as a sterol) has as its foundation a set of four hydrocarbon rings bonded to a variety
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
67
of other atoms and molecules (see Figure 2.23b). Although both plants and animals synthesize sterols, the type that
makes the most important contribution to human structure and function is cholesterol, which is synthesized by the
liver in humans and animals and is also present in most animal-based foods. Like other lipids, cholesterol’s
hydrocarbons make it hydrophobic; however, it has a polar hydroxyl head that is hydrophilic. Cholesterol is an
important component of bile acids, compounds that help emulsify dietary fats. In fact, the word root chole- refers to
bile. Cholesterol is also a building block of many hormones, signaling molecules that the body releases to regulate
processes at distant sites. Finally, like phospholipids, cholesterol molecules are found in the cell membrane, where
their hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions help regulate the flow of substances into and out of the cell.
Prostaglandins
Like a hormone, a prostaglandin is one of a group of signaling molecules, but prostaglandins are derived from
unsaturated fatty acids (see Figure 2.23c). One reason that the omega-3 fatty acids found in fish are beneficial is
that they stimulate the production of certain prostaglandins that help regulate aspects of blood pressure and
inflammation, and thereby reduce the risk for heart disease. Prostaglandins also sensitize nerves to pain. One class
of pain-relieving medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) works by reducing the effects of
prostaglandins.
Proteins
You might associate proteins with muscle tissue, but in fact, proteins are critical components of all tissues and
organs. A protein is an organic molecule composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds. Proteins include the
keratin in the epidermis of skin that protects underlying tissues, the collagen found in the dermis of skin, in bones,
and in the meninges that cover the brain and spinal cord. Proteins are also components of many of the body’s
functional chemicals, including digestive enzymes in the digestive tract, antibodies, the neurotransmitters that
neurons use to communicate with other cells, and the peptide-based hormones that regulate certain body functions
(for instance, growth hormone). While carbohydrates and lipids are composed of hydrocarbons and oxygen, all
proteins also contain nitrogen (N), and many contain sulfur (S), in addition to carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Microstructure of Proteins
Proteins are polymers made up of nitrogen-containing monomers called amino acids. An amino acid is a molecule
composed of an amino group and a carboxyl group, together with a variable side chain. Just 20 different amino acids
contribute to nearly all of the thousands of different proteins important in human structure and function. Body
proteins contain a unique combination of a few dozen to a few hundred of these 20 amino acid monomers. All 20 of
these amino acids share a similar structure (Figure 2.24). All consist of a central carbon atom to which the following
are bonded:
•
a hydrogen atom
•
an alkaline (basic) amino group NH2 (see Table 2.1)
•
an acidic carboxyl group COOH (see Table 2.1)
•
a variable group
FIGURE 2.24
Structure of an Amino Acid
68
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Notice that all amino acids contain both an acid (the carboxyl group) and a base (the amino group) (amine =
“nitrogen-containing”). For this reason, they make excellent buffers, helping the body regulate acid–base balance.
What distinguishes the 20 amino acids from one another is their variable group, which is referred to as a side chain
or an R-group. This group can vary in size and can be polar or nonpolar, giving each amino acid its unique
characteristics. For example, the side chains of two amino acids—cysteine and methionine—contain sulfur. Sulfur
does not readily participate in hydrogen bonds, whereas all other amino acids do. This variation influences the way
that proteins containing cysteine and methionine are assembled.
Amino acids join via dehydration synthesis to form protein polymers (Figure 2.25). The unique bond holding amino
acids together is called a peptide bond. A peptide bond is a covalent bond between two amino acids that forms by
dehydration synthesis. A peptide, in fact, is a very short chain of amino acids. Strands containing fewer than about
100 amino acids are generally referred to as polypeptides rather than proteins.
FIGURE 2.25
Peptide Bond
Different amino acids join together to form peptides, polypeptides, or proteins via dehydration synthesis.
The bonds between the amino acids are peptide bonds R1 and R2 may be the same or different side chains.
The body is able to synthesize most of the amino acids from components of other molecules; however, nine cannot
be synthesized and have to be consumed in the diet. These are known as the essential amino acids.
Free amino acids available for protein construction are said to reside in the amino acid pool within cells. Structures
within cells use these amino acids when assembling proteins. If a particular essential amino acid is not available in
sufficient quantities in the amino acid pool, however, synthesis of proteins containing it can slow or even cease.
Shape of Proteins
Just as a fork cannot be used to eat soup and a spoon cannot be used to spear meat, a protein’s shape is essential
to its function. A protein’s shape is determined, most fundamentally, by the sequence of amino acids of which it is
made (Figure 2.26a). The sequence is called the primary structure of the protein.
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
69
FIGURE 2.26
The Shape of Proteins
(a) The primary structure is the sequence of amino acids that make up the polypeptide chain. (b)
The secondary structure, which can take the form of an alpha-helix or a beta-pleated sheet, is maintained by hydrogen bonds between
amino acids in different regions of the original polypeptide strand. (c) The tertiary structure occurs as a result of further folding and bonding
of the secondary structure. (d) The quaternary structure occurs as a result of interactions between two or more tertiary subunits. The
example shown here is hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells which transports oxygen to body tissues.
Although some polypeptides exist as linear chains, most are twisted or folded into more complex secondary
structures that form when bonding occurs between amino acids with different properties at different regions of the
polypeptide. The most common secondary structure is a spiral called an alpha-helix. If you were to take a length of
string and simply twist it into a spiral, it would not hold the shape. Similarly, a strand of amino acids could not
maintain a stable spiral shape without the help of hydrogen bonds, which create bridges between different regions
of the same strand (see Figure 2.26b). Less commonly, a polypeptide chain can form a beta-pleated sheet, in which
hydrogen bonds form bridges between different regions of a single polypeptide that has folded back upon itself, or
between two or more adjacent polypeptide chains.
The secondary structure of proteins further folds into a compact three-dimensional shape, referred to as the
protein’s tertiary structure (see Figure 2.26c). In this configuration, amino acids that had been very distant in the
primary chain can be brought quite close via hydrogen bonds or, in proteins containing cysteine, via disulfide bonds.
A disulfide bond is a covalent bond between sulfur atoms in a polypeptide. Often, two or more separate
polypeptides bond to form an even larger protein with a quaternary structure (see Figure 2.26d). The polypeptide
subunits forming a quaternary structure can be identical or different. For instance, hemoglobin, the protein found in
red blood cells is composed of four tertiary polypeptides, two of which are called alpha chains and two of which are
called beta chains.
When they are exposed to extreme heat, acids, bases, and certain other substances, proteins will denature.
Denaturation is a change in the structure of a molecule through physical or chemical means. Denatured proteins
lose their functional shape and are no longer able to carry out their jobs. An everyday example of protein
denaturation is the curdling of milk when acidic lemon juice is added.
The contribution of the shape of a protein to its function can hardly be exaggerated. For example, the long, slender
shape of protein strands that make up muscle tissue is essential to their ability to contract (shorten) and relax
(lengthen). As another example, bones contain long threads of a protein called collagen that acts as scaffolding
70
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
upon which bone minerals are deposited. These elongated proteins, called fibrous proteins, are strong and durable
and typically hydrophobic.
In contrast, globular proteins are globes or spheres that tend to be highly reactive and are hydrophilic. The
hemoglobin proteins packed into red blood cells are an example (see Figure 2.26d); however, globular proteins are
abundant throughout the body, playing critical roles in most body functions. Enzymes, introduced earlier as protein
catalysts, are examples of this. The next section takes a closer look at the action of enzymes.
Proteins Function as Enzymes
If you were trying to type a paper, and every time you hit a key on your laptop there was a delay of six or seven
minutes before you got a response, you would probably get a new laptop. In a similar way, without enzymes to
catalyze chemical reactions, the human body would be nonfunctional. It functions only because enzymes function.
Enzymatic reactions—chemical reactions catalyzed by enzymes—begin when substrates bind to the enzyme. A
substrate is a reactant in an enzymatic reaction. This occurs on regions of the enzyme known as active sites (Figure
2.27). Any given enzyme catalyzes just one type of chemical reaction. This characteristic, called specificity, is due to
the fact that a substrate with a particular shape and electrical charge can bind only to an active site corresponding
to that substrate.
Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates, enzymes are known for their specificity.
In fact, as an enzyme binds to its substrate(s), the enzyme structure changes slightly to find the best fit between the
transition state (a structural intermediate between the substrate and product) and the active site, just as a rubber
glove molds to a hand inserted into it. This active-site modification in the presence of substrate, along with the
simultaneous formation of the transition state, is called induced fit. Overall, there is a specifically matched enzyme
for each substrate and, thus, for each chemical reaction; however, there is some flexibility as well. Some enzymes
have the ability to act on several different structurally related substrates.
FIGURE 2.27
Steps in an Enzymatic Reaction
According to the induced-fit model, the active site of the enzyme undergoes
conformational changes upon binding with the substrate.(a) Substrates approach active sites on enzyme. (b) Substrates bind to active sites,
producing an enzyme–substrate complex. (c) Changes internal to the enzyme–substrate complex facilitate interaction of the substrates. (d)
Products are released and the enzyme returns to its original form, ready to facilitate another enzymatic reaction.
Binding of a substrate produces an enzyme–substrate complex. It is likely that enzymes speed up chemical
reactions in part because the enzyme–substrate complex undergoes a set of temporary and reversible changes that
cause the substrates to be oriented toward each other in an optimal position to facilitate their interaction. This
promotes increased reaction speed. The enzyme then releases the product(s), and resumes its original shape. The
enzyme is then free to engage in the process again, and will do so as long as substrate remains.
Other Functions of Proteins
Advertisements for protein bars, powders, and shakes all say that protein is important in building, repairing, and
maintaining muscle tissue, but the truth is that proteins contribute to all body tissues, from the skin to the brain
cells. Also, certain proteins act as hormones, chemical messengers that help regulate body functions, For example,
growth hormone is important for skeletal growth, among other roles.
As was noted earlier, the basic and acidic components enable proteins to function as buffers in maintaining
acid–base balance, but they also help regulate fluid–electrolyte balance. Proteins attract fluid, and a healthy
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
71
concentration of proteins in the blood, the cells, and the spaces between cells helps ensure a balance of fluids in
these various “compartments.” Moreover, proteins in the cell membrane help to transport electrolytes in and out of
the cell, keeping these ions in a healthy balance. Like lipids, proteins can bind with carbohydrates. They can thereby
produce glycoproteins or proteoglycans, both of which have many functions in the body.
The body can use proteins for energy when carbohydrate and fat intake is inadequate, and stores of glycogen and
adipose tissue become depleted. However, since there is no storage site for protein except functional tissues, using
protein for energy causes tissue breakdown, and results in body wasting.
Nucleotides
The fourth type of organic compound important to human structure and function are the nucleotides (Figure 2.28). A
nucleotide is one of a class of organic compounds composed of three subunits:
•
one or more phosphate groups
•
a pentose sugar: either deoxyribose or ribose
•
a nitrogen-containing base: adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine, or uracil
Nucleotides can be assembled into nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) or the energy compound adenosine triphosphate.
FIGURE 2.28
Nucleotides
(a) The building blocks of all nucleotides are one or more phosphate groups, a pentose sugar, and a nitrogen-
containing base. (b) The nitrogen-containing bases of nucleotides. (c) The two pentose sugars of DNA and RNA.
Nucleic Acids
The nucleic acids differ in their type of pentose sugar. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is nucleotide that stores
genetic information. DNA contains deoxyribose (so-called because it has one less atom of oxygen than ribose) plus
one phosphate group and one nitrogen-containing base. The “choices” of base for DNA are adenine, cytosine,
guanine, and thymine. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is a ribose-containing nucleotide that helps manifest the genetic
code as protein. RNA contains ribose, one phosphate group, and one nitrogen-containing base, but the “choices” of
base for RNA are adenine, cytosine, guanine, and uracil.
The nitrogen-containing bases adenine and guanine are classified as purines. A purine is a nitrogen-containing
molecule with a double ring structure, which accommodates several nitrogen atoms. The bases cytosine, thymine
(found in DNA only) and uracil (found in RNA only) are pyramidines. A pyramidine is a nitrogen-containing base with
72
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
a single ring structure
Bonds formed by dehydration synthesis between the pentose sugar of one nucleic acid monomer and the phosphate
group of another form a “backbone,” from which the components’ nitrogen-containing bases protrude. In DNA, two
such backbones attach at their protruding bases via hydrogen bonds. These twist to form a shape known as a
double helix (Figure 2.29). The sequence of nitrogen-containing bases within a strand of DNA form the genes that
act as a molecular code instructing cells in the assembly of amino acids into proteins. Humans have almost 22,000
genes in their DNA, locked up in the 46 chromosomes inside the nucleus of each cell (except red blood cells which
lose their nuclei during development). These genes carry the genetic code to build one’s body, and are unique for
each individual except identical twins.
FIGURE 2.29
DNA
In the DNA double helix, two strands attach via hydrogen bonds between the bases of the component nucleotides.
In contrast, RNA consists of a single strand of sugar-phosphate backbone studded with bases. Messenger RNA
(mRNA) is created during protein synthesis to carry the genetic instructions from the DNA to the cell’s protein
manufacturing plants in the cytoplasm, the ribosomes.
Adenosine Triphosphate
The nucleotide adenosine triphosphate (ATP), is composed of a ribose sugar, an adenine base, and three phosphate
groups (Figure 2.30). ATP is classified as a high energy compound because the two covalent bonds linking its three
phosphates store a significant amount of potential energy. In the body, the energy released from these high energy
bonds helps fuel the body’s activities, from muscle contraction to the transport of substances in and out of cells to
anabolic chemical reactions.
2.5 • Organic Compounds Essential to Human Functioning
73
FIGURE 2.30
Structure of Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP)
When a phosphate group is cleaved from ATP, the products are adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic
phosphate (Pi). This hydrolysis reaction can be written:
Removal of a second phosphate leaves adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and two phosphate groups. Again, these
reactions also liberate the energy that had been stored in the phosphate-phosphate bonds. They are reversible, too,
as when ADP undergoes phosphorylation. Phosphorylation is the addition of a phosphate group to an organic
compound, in this case, resulting in ATP. In such cases, the same level of energy that had been released during
hydrolysis must be reinvested to power dehydration synthesis.
Cells can also transfer a phosphate group from ATP to another organic compound. For example, when glucose first
enters a cell, a phosphate group is transferred from ATP, forming glucose phosphate (C6H12O6—P) and ADP. Once
glucose is phosphorylated in this way, it can be stored as glycogen or metabolized for immediate energy.
74
2 • The Chemical Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
acid
compound that releases hydrogen ions (H+) in
solution
activation energy
amount of energy greater than the
energy contained in the reactants, which must be
overcome for a reaction to proceed
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
nucleotide containing
ribose and an adenine base that is essential in
energy transfer
amino acid
building block of proteins; characterized
by an amino and carboxyl functional groups and a
variable side-chain
anion
atom with a negative charge
atom
smallest unit of an element that retains the
unique properties of that element
atomic number
number of protons in the nucleus of
an atom
base
compound that accepts hydrogen ions (H+) in
solution
bond
electrical force linking atoms
buffer
solution containing a weak acid or a weak base
that opposes wide fluctuations in the pH of body
fluids
carbohydrate
class of organic compounds built from
sugars, molecules containing carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen in a 1-2-1 ratio
catalyst
substance that increases the rate of a
chemical reaction without itself being changed in
the process
cation
atom with a positive charge
chemical energy
form of energy that is absorbed as
chemical bonds form, stored as they are
maintained, and released as they are broken
colloid
liquid mixture in which the solute particles
consist of clumps of molecules large enough to
scatter light
compound
substance composed of two or more
different elements joined by chemical bonds
concentration
number of particles within a given
space
covalent bond
chemical bond in which two atoms
share electrons, thereby completing their valence
shells
decomposition reaction
type of catabolic reaction in
which one or more bonds within a larger molecule
are broken, resulting in the release of smaller
molecules or atoms
denaturation
change in the structure of a molecule
through physical or chemical means
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
deoxyribose-containing
nucleotide that stores genetic information
disaccharide
pair of carbohydrate monomers bonded
by dehydration synthesis via a glycosidic bond
disulfide bond
covalent bond formed within a
polypeptide between sulfide groups of sulfur-
containing amino acids, for example, cysteine
electron
subatomic particle having a negative charge
and nearly no mass; found orbiting the atom’s
nucleus
electron shell
area of space a given distance from an
atom’s nucleus in which electrons are grouped
element
substance that cannot be created or broken
down by ordinary chemical means
enzyme
protein or RNA that catalyzes chemical
reactions
exchange reaction
type of chemical reaction in which
bonds are both formed and broken, resulting in the
transfer of components
functional group
group of atoms linked by strong
covalent bonds that tends to behave as a distinct
unit in chemical reactions with other atoms
hydrogen bond
dipole-dipole bond in which a
hydrogen atom covalently bonded to an
electronegative atom is weakly attracted to a
second electronegative atom
inorganic compound
substance that does not contain
both carbon and hydrogen
ion
atom with an overall positive or negative charge
ionic bond
attraction between an anion and a cation
isotope
one of the variations of an element in which
the number of neutrons differ from each other
kinetic energy
energy that matter possesses because
of its motion
lipid
class of nonpolar organic compounds built from
hydrocarbons and distinguished by the fact that
they are not soluble in water
macromolecule
large molecule formed by covalent
bonding
mass number
sum of the number of protons and
neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
matter
physical substance; that which occupies
space and has mass
molecule
two or more atoms covalently bonded
together
monosaccharide
monomer of carbohydrate; also
known as a simple sugar
neutron
heavy subatomic particle having no electrical
charge and found in the atom’s nucleus
nucleotide
class of organic compounds composed of
one or more phosphate groups, a pentose sugar,
and a base
organic compound
substance that contains both
carbon and hydrogen
peptide bond
covalent bond formed by dehydration
synthesis between two amino acids
2 • Key Terms
75
periodic table of the elements
arrangement of the
elements in a table according to their atomic
number; elements having similar properties
because of their electron arrangements compose
columns in the table, while elements having the
same number of valence shells compose rows in the
table
pH
negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion (H+)
concentration of a solution
phospholipid
a lipid compound in which a phosphate
group is combined with a diglyceride
phosphorylation
addition of one or more phosphate
groups to an organic compound
polar molecule
molecule with regions that have
opposite charges resulting from uneven numbers of
electrons in the nuclei of the atoms participating in
the covalent bond
polysaccharide
compound consisting of more than
two carbohydrate monomers bonded by
dehydration synthesis via glycosidic bonds
potential energy
stored energy matter possesses
because of the positioning or structure of its
components
product
one or more substances produced by a
chemical reaction
prostaglandin
lipid compound derived from fatty acid
chains and important in regulating several body
processes
protein
class of organic compounds that are
composed of many amino acids linked together by
peptide bonds
proton
heavy subatomic particle having a positive
charge and found in the atom’s nucleus
purine
nitrogen-containing base with a double ring
structure; adenine and guanine
pyrimidine
nitrogen-containing base with a single
ring structure; cytosine, thiamine, and uracil
radioactive isotope
unstable, heavy isotope that
gives off subatomic particles, or electromagnetic
energy, as it decays; also called radioisotopes
reactant
one or more substances that enter into the
reaction
ribonucleic acid (RNA)
ribose-containing nucleotide
that helps manifest the genetic code as protein
solution
homogeneous liquid mixture in which a
solute is dissolved into molecules within a solvent
steroid
(also, sterol) lipid compound composed of
four hydrocarbon rings bonded to a variety of other
atoms and molecules
substrate
reactant in an enzymatic reaction
suspension
liquid mixture in which particles
distributed in the liquid settle out over time
synthesis reaction
type of anabolic reaction in which
two or more atoms or molecules bond, resulting in
the formation of a larger molecule
triglyceride
lipid compound composed of a glycerol
molecule bonded with three fatty acid chains
valence shell
outermost electron shell of an atom
Chapter Review
2.1 Elements and Atoms: The Building
Blocks of Matter
The human body is composed of elements, the most
abundant of which are oxygen (O), carbon (C),
hydrogen (H) and nitrogen (N). You obtain these
elements from the foods you eat and the air you
breathe. The smallest unit of an element that retains all
of the properties of that element is an atom. But,
atoms themselves contain many subatomic particles,
the three most important of which are protons,
neutrons, and electrons. These particles do not vary in
quality from one element to another; rather, what gives
an element its distinctive identification is the quantity
of its protons, called its atomic number. Protons and
neutrons contribute nearly all of an atom’s mass; the
number of protons and neutrons is an element’s mass
number. Heavier and lighter versions of the same
element can occur in nature because these versions
have different numbers of neutrons. Different versions
of an element are called isotopes.
The tendency of an atom to be stable or to react readily
with other atoms is largely due to the behavior of the
electrons within the atom’s outermost electron shell,
called its valence shell. Helium, as well as larger atoms
with eight electrons in their valence shell, is unlikely to
participate in chemical reactions because they are
stable. All other atoms tend to accept, donate, or share
electrons in a process that brings the electrons in their
valence shell to eight (or in the case of hydrogen, to
two).
2.2 Chemical Bonds
Each moment of life, atoms of oxygen, carbon,
hydrogen, and the other elements of the human body
are making and breaking chemical bonds. Ions are
charged atoms that form when an atom donates or
accepts one or more negatively charged electrons.
Cations (ions with a positive charge) are attracted to
anions (ions with a negative charge). This attraction is
called an ionic bond. In covalent bonds, the
participating atoms do not lose or gain electrons, but
rather share them. Molecules with nonpolar covalent
bonds are electrically balanced, and have a linear
76
2 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
three-dimensional shape. Molecules with polar
covalent bonds have “poles”—regions of weakly
positive and negative charge—and have a triangular
three-dimensional shape. An atom of oxygen and two
atoms of hydrogen form water molecules by means of
polar covalent bonds. Hydrogen bonds link hydrogen
atoms already participating in polar covalent bonds to
anions or electronegative regions of other polar
molecules. Hydrogen bonds link water molecules,
resulting in the properties of water that are important
to living things.
2.3 Chemical Reactions
Chemical reactions, in which chemical bonds are
broken and formed, require an initial investment of
energy. Kinetic energy, the energy of matter in motion,
fuels the collisions of atoms, ions, and molecules that
are necessary if their old bonds are to break and new
ones to form. All molecules store potential energy,
which is released when their bonds are broken.
Four forms of energy essential to human functioning
are: chemical energy, which is stored and released as
chemical bonds are formed and broken; mechanical
energy, which directly powers physical activity; radiant
energy, emitted as waves such as in sunlight; and
electrical energy, the power of moving electrons.
Chemical reactions begin with reactants and end with
products. Synthesis reactions bond reactants together,
a process that requires energy, whereas decomposition
reactions break the bonds within a reactant and
thereby release energy. In exchange reactions, bonds
are both broken and formed, and energy is exchanged.
The rate at which chemical reactions occur is
influenced by several properties of the reactants:
temperature, concentration and pressure, and the
presence or absence of a catalyst. An enzyme is a
catalytic protein that speeds up chemical reactions in
the human body.
2.4 Inorganic Compounds Essential to
Human Functioning
Inorganic compounds essential to human functioning
include water, salts, acids, and bases. These
compounds are inorganic; that is, they do not contain
both hydrogen and carbon. Water is a lubricant and
cushion, a heat sink, a component of liquid mixtures, a
byproduct of dehydration synthesis reactions, and a
reactant in hydrolysis reactions. Salts are compounds
that, when dissolved in water, dissociate into ions other
than H+ or OH–. In contrast, acids release H+ in
solution, making it more acidic. Bases accept H+,
thereby making the solution more alkaline (caustic).
The pH of any solution is its relative concentration of
H+. A solution with pH 7 is neutral. Solutions with pH
below 7 are acids, and solutions with pH above 7 are
bases. A change in a single digit on the pH scale (e.g.,
from 7 to 8) represents a ten-fold increase or decrease
in the concentration of H+. In a healthy adult, the pH of
blood ranges from 7.35 to 7.45. Homeostatic control
mechanisms important for keeping blood in a healthy
pH range include chemicals called buffers, weak acids
and weak bases released when the pH of blood or
other body fluids fluctuates in either direction outside
of this normal range.
2.5 Organic Compounds Essential to Human
Functioning
Organic compounds essential to human functioning
include carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleotides. These compounds are said to be organic
because they contain both carbon and hydrogen.
Carbon atoms in organic compounds readily share
electrons with hydrogen and other atoms, usually
oxygen, and sometimes nitrogen. Carbon atoms also
may bond with one or more functional groups such as
carboxyls, hydroxyls, aminos, or phosphates.
Monomers are single units of organic compounds. They
bond by dehydration synthesis to form polymers, which
can in turn be broken by hydrolysis.
Carbohydrate compounds provide essential body fuel.
Their structural forms include monosaccharides such
as glucose, disaccharides such as lactose, and
polysaccharides, including starches (polymers of
glucose), glycogen (the storage form of glucose), and
fiber. All body cells can use glucose for fuel. It is
converted via an oxidation-reduction reaction to ATP.
Lipids are hydrophobic compounds that provide body
fuel and are important components of many biological
compounds. Triglycerides are the most abundant lipid
in the body, and are composed of a glycerol backbone
attached to three fatty acid chains. Phospholipids are
compounds composed of a diglyceride with a
phosphate group attached at the molecule’s head. The
result is a molecule with polar and nonpolar regions.
Steroids are lipids formed of four hydrocarbon rings.
The most important is cholesterol. Prostaglandins are
signaling molecules derived from unsaturated fatty
acids.
Proteins are critical components of all body tissues.
They are made up of monomers called amino acids,
which contain nitrogen, joined by peptide bonds.
Protein shape is critical to its function. Most body
proteins are globular. An example is enzymes, which
catalyze chemical reactions.
2 • Chapter Review
77
Nucleotides are compounds with three building blocks:
one or more phosphate groups, a pentose sugar, and a
nitrogen-containing base. DNA and RNA are nucleic
acids that function in protein synthesis. ATP is the
body’s fundamental molecule of energy transfer.
Removal or addition of phosphates releases or invests
energy.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/ptable) to
view the periodic table. In the periodic table of the
elements, elements in a single column have the
same number of electrons that can participate in a
chemical reaction. These electrons are known as
“valence electrons.” For example, the elements in
the first column all have a single valence
electron—an electron that can be “donated” in a
chemical reaction with another atom. What is the
meaning of a mass number shown in parentheses?
2. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/
electenergy) to learn about electrical energy and
the attraction/repulsion of charges. What happens
to the charged electroscope when a conductor is
moved between its plastic sheets, and why?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
disaccharide) to observe the formation of a
disaccharide. What happens when water
encounters a glycosidic bond?
Review Questions
4. Together, just four elements make up more than 95
percent of the body’s mass. These include
________.
a.
calcium, magnesium, iron, and carbon
b.
oxygen, calcium, iron, and nitrogen
c.
sodium, chlorine, carbon, and hydrogen
d.
oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen
5. The smallest unit of an element that still retains the
distinctive behavior of that element is an ________.
a.
electron
b.
atom
c.
elemental particle
d.
isotope
6. The characteristic that gives an element its
distinctive properties is its number of ________.
a.
protons
b.
neutrons
c.
electrons
d.
atoms
7. On the periodic table of the elements, mercury (Hg)
has an atomic number of 80 and a mass number of
200.59. It has seven stable isotopes. The most
abundant of these probably have ________.
a.
about 80 neutrons each
b.
fewer than 80 neutrons each
c.
more than 80 neutrons each
d.
more electrons than neutrons
8. Nitrogen has an atomic number of seven. How
many electron shells does it likely have?
a.
one
b.
two
c.
three
d.
four
9. Which of the following is a molecule, but not a
compound?
a.
H2O
b.
2H
c.
H2
d.
H+
10. A molecule of ammonia contains one atom of
nitrogen and three atoms of hydrogen. These are
linked with ________.
a.
ionic bonds
b.
nonpolar covalent bonds
c.
polar covalent bonds
d.
hydrogen bonds
11. When an atom donates an electron to another
atom, it becomes
a.
an ion
b.
an anion
c.
nonpolar
d.
all of the above
12. A substance formed of crystals of equal numbers
of cations and anions held together by ionic bonds
is called a(n) ________.
a.
noble gas
b.
salt
c.
electrolyte
d.
dipole
78
2 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
13. Which of the following statements about chemical
bonds is true?
a.
Covalent bonds are stronger than ionic bonds.
b.
Hydrogen bonds occur between two atoms of
hydrogen.
c.
Bonding readily occurs between nonpolar and
polar molecules.
d.
A molecule of water is unlikely to bond with
an ion.
14. The energy stored in a foot of snow on a steep roof
is ________.
a.
potential energy
b.
kinetic energy
c.
radiant energy
d.
activation energy
15. The bonding of calcium, phosphorus, and other
elements produces mineral crystals that are found
in bone. This is an example of a(n) ________
reaction.
a.
catabolic
b.
synthesis
c.
decomposition
d.
exchange
16.
is a general notation for a(n)
________ reaction.
a.
anabolic
b.
endergonic
c.
decomposition
d.
exchange
17. ________ reactions release energy.
a.
Catabolic
b.
Exergonic
c.
Decomposition
d.
Catabolic, exergonic, and decomposition
18. Which of the following combinations of atoms is
most likely to result in a chemical reaction?
a.
hydrogen and hydrogen
b.
hydrogen and helium
c.
helium and helium
d.
neon and helium
19. Chewing a bite of bread mixes it with saliva and
facilitates its chemical breakdown. This is most
likely due to the fact that ________.
a.
the inside of the mouth maintains a very high
temperature
b.
chewing stores potential energy
c.
chewing facilitates synthesis reactions
d.
saliva contains enzymes
20. CH4 is methane. This compound is ________.
a.
inorganic
b.
organic
c.
reactive
d.
a crystal
21. Which of the following is most likely to be found
evenly distributed in water in a homogeneous
solution?
a.
sodium ions and chloride ions
b.
NaCl molecules
c.
salt crystals
d.
red blood cells
22. Jenny mixes up a batch of pancake batter, then
stirs in some chocolate chips. As she is waiting for
the first few pancakes to cook, she notices the
chocolate chips sinking to the bottom of the clear
glass mixing bowl. The chocolate-chip batter is an
example of a ________.
a.
solvent
b.
solute
c.
solution
d.
suspension
23. A substance dissociates into K+ and Cl– in
solution. The substance is a(n) ________.
a.
acid
b.
base
c.
salt
d.
buffer
24. Ty is three years old and as a result of a “stomach
bug” has been vomiting for about 24 hours. His
blood pH is 7.48. What does this mean?
a.
Ty’s blood is slightly acidic.
b.
Ty’s blood is slightly alkaline.
c.
Ty’s blood is highly acidic.
d.
Ty’s blood is within the normal range
25. C6H12O6 is the chemical formula for a ________.
a.
polymer of carbohydrate
b.
pentose monosaccharide
c.
hexose monosaccharide
d.
all of the above
26. What organic compound do brain cells primarily
rely on for fuel?
a.
glucose
b.
glycogen
c.
galactose
d.
glycerol
2 • Review Questions
79
27. Which of the following is a functional group that is
part of a building block of proteins?
a.
phosphate
b.
adenine
c.
amino
d.
ribose
28. A pentose sugar is a part of the monomer used to
build which type of macromolecule?
a.
polysaccharides
b.
nucleic acids
c.
phosphorylated glucose
d.
glycogen
29. A phospholipid ________.
a.
has both polar and nonpolar regions
b.
is made up of a triglyceride bonded to a
phosphate group
c.
is a building block of ATP
d.
can donate both cations and anions in
solution
30. In DNA, nucleotide bonding forms a compound
with a characteristic shape known as a(n)
________.
a.
beta chain
b.
pleated sheet
c.
alpha helix
d.
double helix
31. Uracil ________.
a.
contains nitrogen
b.
is a pyrimidine
c.
is found in RNA
d.
all of the above
32. The ability of an enzyme’s active sites to bind only
substrates of compatible shape and charge is
known as ________.
a.
selectivity
b.
specificity
c.
subjectivity
d.
specialty
Critical Thinking Questions
33. The most abundant elements in the foods and
beverages you consume are oxygen, carbon,
hydrogen, and nitrogen. Why might having these
elements in consumables be useful?
34. Oxygen, whose atomic number is eight, has three
stable isotopes: 16O, 17O, and 18O. Explain what
this means in terms of the number of protons and
neutrons.
35. Magnesium is an important element in the human
body, especially in bones. Magnesium’s atomic
number is 12. Is it stable or reactive? Why? If it
were to react with another atom, would it be more
likely to accept or to donate one or more
electrons?
36. Explain why CH4 is one of the most common
molecules found in nature. Are the bonds between
the atoms ionic or covalent?
37. In a hurry one day, you merely rinse your lunch
dishes with water. As you are drying your salad
bowl, you notice that it still has an oily film. Why
was the water alone not effective in cleaning the
bowl?
38. Could two atoms of oxygen engage in ionic
bonding? Why or why not?
39.
Is this a legitimate
example of an exchange reaction? Why or why
not?
40. When you do a load of laundry, why do you not just
drop a bar of soap into the washing machine? In
other words, why is laundry detergent sold as a
liquid or powder?
41. The pH of lemon juice is 2, and the pH of orange
juice is 4. Which of these is more acidic, and by
how much? What does this mean?
42. During a party, Eli loses a bet and is forced to drink
a bottle of lemon juice. Not long thereafter, he
begins complaining of having difficulty breathing,
and his friends take him to the local emergency
room. There, he is given an intravenous solution of
bicarbonate. Why?
43. If the disaccharide maltose is formed from two
glucose monosaccharides, which are hexose
sugars, how many atoms of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen does maltose contain and why?
44. Once dietary fats are digested and absorbed, why
can they not be released directly into the
bloodstream?
80
2 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 3
The Cellular Level of Organization
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the cell membrane, including its regulation of materials into and out of
the cell
•
Describe the functions of the various cytoplasmic organelles
•
Explain the structure and contents of the nucleus, as well as the process of DNA replication
•
Explain the process by which a cell builds proteins using the DNA code
•
List the stages of the cell cycle in order, including the steps of cell division in somatic cells
•
Discuss how a cell differentiates and becomes more specialized
•
List the morphological and physiological characteristics of some representative cell types in the human body
You developed from a single fertilized egg cell into the complex organism containing trillions of
cells that you see when you look in a mirror. During this developmental process, early, undifferentiated cells
differentiate and become specialized in their structure and function. These different cell types form specialized
tissues that work in concert to perform all of the functions necessary for the living organism. Cellular and
developmental biologists study how the continued division of a single cell leads to such complexity and
differentiation.
Consider the difference between a structural cell in the skin and a nerve cell. A structural skin cell may be shaped
like a flat plate (squamous) and live only for a short time before it is shed and replaced. Packed tightly into rows and
sheets, the squamous skin cells provide a protective barrier for the cells and tissues that lie beneath. A nerve cell,
on the other hand, may be shaped something like a star, sending out long processes up to a meter in length and may
live for the entire lifetime of the organism. With their long winding appendages, nerve cells can communicate with
one another and with other types of body cells and send rapid signals that inform the organism about its
environment and allow it to interact with that environment. These differences illustrate one very important theme
that is consistent at all organizational levels of biology: the form of a structure is optimally suited to perform
particular functions assigned to that structure. Keep this theme in mind as you tour the inside of a cell and are
Figure 3.1
Fluorescence-stained Cell Undergoing Mitosis A lung cell from a newt, commonly studied for its similarity to human lung
cells, is stained with fluorescent dyes. The green stain reveals mitotic spindles, red is the cell membrane and part of the cytoplasm, and the
structures that appear light blue are chromosomes. This cell is in anaphase of mitosis. (credit: “Mortadelo2005”/Wikimedia Commons)
introduced to the various types of cells in the body.
A primary responsibility of each cell is to contribute to homeostasis. Homeostasis is a term used in biology that
refers to a dynamic state of balance within parameters that are compatible with life. For example, living cells require
a water-based environment to survive in, and there are various physical (anatomical) and physiological mechanisms
that keep all of the trillions of living cells in the human body moist. This is one aspect of homeostasis. When a
particular parameter, such as blood pressure or blood oxygen content, moves far enough out of homeostasis
(generally becoming too high or too low), illness or disease—and sometimes death—inevitably results.
The concept of a cell started with microscopic observations of dead cork tissue by scientist Robert Hooke in 1665.
Without realizing their function or importance, Hook coined the term “cell” based on the resemblance of the small
subdivisions in the cork to the rooms that monks inhabited, called cells. About ten years later, Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek became the first person to observe living and moving cells under a microscope. In the century that
followed, the theory that cells represented the basic unit of life would develop. These tiny fluid-filled sacs house
components responsible for the thousands of biochemical reactions necessary for an organism to grow and survive.
In this chapter, you will learn about the major components and functions of a prototypical, generalized cell and
discover some of the different types of cells in the human body.
3.1 The Cell Membrane
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the molecular components that make up the cell membrane
•
Explain the major features and properties of the cell membrane
•
Differentiate between materials that can and cannot diffuse through the lipid bilayer
•
Compare and contrast different types of passive transport with active transport, providing examples of each
Despite differences in structure and function, all living cells in multicellular organisms have a surrounding cell
membrane. As the outer layer of your skin separates your body from its environment, the cell membrane (also
known as the plasma membrane) separates the inner contents of a cell from its exterior environment. This cell
membrane provides a protective barrier around the cell and regulates which materials can pass in or out.
Structure and Composition of the Cell Membrane
The cell membrane is an extremely pliable structure composed primarily of back-to-back phospholipids (a
“bilayer”). Cholesterol is also present, which contributes to the fluidity of the membrane, and there are various
proteins embedded within the membrane that have a variety of functions.
A single phospholipid molecule has a phosphate group on one end, called the “head,” and two side-by-side chains
of fatty acids that make up the lipid tails (Figure 3.2). The phosphate group is negatively charged, making the head
polar and hydrophilic—or “water loving.” A hydrophilic molecule (or region of a molecule) is one that is attracted to
water. The phosphate heads are thus attracted to the water molecules of both the extracellular and intracellular
environments. The lipid tails, on the other hand, are uncharged, or nonpolar, and are hydrophobic—or “water
fearing.” A hydrophobic molecule (or region of a molecule) repels and is repelled by water. Some lipid tails consist
of saturated fatty acids and some contain unsaturated fatty acids. This combination adds to the fluidity of the tails
that are constantly in motion. Phospholipids are thus amphipathic molecules. An amphipathic molecule is one that
contains both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic region. In fact, soap works to remove oil and grease stains because it
has amphipathic properties. The hydrophilic portion can dissolve in water while the hydrophobic portion can trap
grease in micelles that then can be washed away.
82
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.2
Phospholipid Structure
A phospholipid molecule consists of a polar phosphate “head,” which is hydrophilic and a non-
polar lipid “tail,” which is hydrophobic. Unsaturated fatty acids result in kinks in the hydrophobic tails.
The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of phospholipids. The lipid tails of one layer face the lipid tails of
the other layer, meeting at the interface of the two layers. The phospholipid heads face outward, one layer exposed
to the interior of the cell and one layer exposed to the exterior (Figure 3.3). Because the phosphate groups are polar
and hydrophilic, they are attracted to water in the intracellular fluid. Intracellular fluid (ICF) is the fluid interior of
the cell. The phosphate groups are also attracted to the extracellular fluid. Extracellular fluid (ECF) is the fluid
environment outside the enclosure of the cell membrane. Interstitial fluid (IF) is the term given to extracellular
fluid not contained within blood vessels. Because the lipid tails are hydrophobic, they meet in the inner region of the
membrane, excluding watery intracellular and extracellular fluid from this space. The cell membrane has many
proteins, as well as other lipids (such as cholesterol), that are associated with the phospholipid bilayer. An important
feature of the membrane is that it remains fluid; the lipids and proteins in the cell membrane are not rigidly locked in
place.
FIGURE 3.3
Phospholipid Bilayer
The phospholipid bilayer consists of two adjacent sheets of phospholipids, arranged tail to tail. The
hydrophobic tails associate with one another, forming the interior of the membrane. The polar heads contact the fluid inside and outside of
the cell.
Membrane Proteins
The lipid bilayer forms the basis of the cell membrane, but it is peppered throughout with various proteins. Two
different types of proteins that are commonly associated with the cell membrane are the integral proteins and
peripheral protein (Figure 3.4). As its name suggests, an integral protein is a protein that is embedded in the
membrane. A channel protein is an example of an integral protein that selectively allows particular materials, such
3.1 • The Cell Membrane
83
as certain ions, to pass into or out of the cell.
FIGURE 3.4
Cell Membrane
The cell membrane of the cell is a phospholipid bilayer containing many different molecular components,
including proteins and cholesterol, some with carbohydrate groups attached.
Another important group of integral proteins are cell recognition proteins, which serve to mark a cell’s identity so
that it can be recognized by other cells. A receptor is a type of recognition protein that can selectively bind a specific
molecule outside the cell, and this binding induces a chemical reaction within the cell. A ligand is the specific
molecule that binds to and activates a receptor. Some integral proteins serve dual roles as both a receptor and an
ion channel. One example of a receptor-ligand interaction is the receptors on nerve cells that bind
neurotransmitters, such as dopamine. When a dopamine molecule binds to a dopamine receptor protein, a channel
within the transmembrane protein opens to allow certain ions to flow into the cell.
Some integral membrane proteins are glycoproteins. A glycoprotein is a protein that has carbohydrate molecules
attached, which extend into the extracellular matrix. The attached carbohydrate tags on glycoproteins aid in cell
recognition. The carbohydrates that extend from membrane proteins and even from some membrane lipids
collectively form the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx is a fuzzy-appearing coating around the cell formed from
glycoproteins and other carbohydrates attached to the cell membrane. The glycocalyx can have various roles. For
example, it may have molecules that allow the cell to bind to another cell, it may contain receptors for hormones, or
it might have enzymes to break down nutrients. The glycocalyces found in a person’s body are products of that
person’s genetic makeup. They give each of the individual’s trillions of cells the “identity” of belonging in the
person’s body. This identity is the primary way that a person’s immune defense cells “know” not to attack the
person’s own body cells, but it also is the reason organs donated by another person might be rejected.
Peripheral proteins are typically found on the inner or outer surface of the lipid bilayer but can also be attached to
the internal or external surface of an integral protein. These proteins typically perform a specific function for the
cell. Some peripheral proteins on the surface of intestinal cells, for example, act as digestive enzymes to break down
nutrients to sizes that can pass through the cells and into the bloodstream.
Transport across the Cell Membrane
One of the great wonders of the cell membrane is its ability to regulate the concentration of substances inside the
cell. These substances include ions such as Ca++, Na+, K+, and Cl–; nutrients including sugars, fatty acids, and amino
acids; and waste products, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2), which must leave the cell.
The membrane’s lipid bilayer structure provides the first level of control. The phospholipids are tightly packed
together, and the membrane has a hydrophobic interior. This structure causes the membrane to be selectively
permeable. A membrane that has selective permeability allows only substances meeting certain criteria to pass
through it unaided. In the case of the cell membrane, only relatively small, nonpolar materials can move through the
lipid bilayer (remember, the lipid tails of the membrane are nonpolar). Some examples of these are other lipids,
oxygen and carbon dioxide gases, and alcohol. However, water-soluble materials—like glucose, amino acids, and
electrolytes—need some assistance to cross the membrane because they are repelled by the hydrophobic tails of
the phospholipid bilayer. All substances that move through the membrane do so by one of two general methods,
which are categorized based on whether or not energy is required. Passive transport is the movement of
84
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
substances across the membrane without the expenditure of cellular energy. In contrast, active transport is the
movement of substances across the membrane using energy from adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Passive Transport
In order to understand how substances move passively across a cell membrane, it is necessary to understand
concentration gradients and diffusion. A concentration gradient is the difference in concentration of a substance
across a space. Molecules (or ions) will spread/diffuse from where they are more concentrated to where they are
less concentrated until they are equally distributed in that space. (When molecules move in this way, they are said to
move down their concentration gradient.) Diffusion is the movement of particles from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration. A couple of common examples will help to illustrate this concept.
Imagine being inside a closed bathroom. If a bottle of perfume were sprayed, the scent molecules would naturally
diffuse from the spot where they left the bottle to all corners of the bathroom, and this diffusion would go on until no
more concentration gradient remains. Another example is a spoonful of sugar placed in a cup of tea. Eventually the
sugar will diffuse throughout the tea until no concentration gradient remains. In both cases, if the room is warmer or
the tea hotter, diffusion occurs even faster as the molecules are bumping into each other and spreading out faster
than at cooler temperatures. Having an internal body temperature around 98.6° F thus also aids in diffusion of
particles within the body.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/diffusion) to see diffusion and how it is propelled by the kinetic energy of
molecules in solution. How does temperature affect diffusion rate, and why?
Whenever a substance exists in greater concentration on one side of a semipermeable membrane, such as the cell
membranes, any substance that can move down its concentration gradient across the membrane will do so.
Consider substances that can easily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane, such as the gases oxygen
(O2) and CO2. O2 generally diffuses into cells because it is more concentrated outside of them, and CO2 typically
diffuses out of cells because it is more concentrated inside of them. Neither of these examples requires any energy
on the part of the cell, and therefore they use passive transport to move across the membrane.
Before moving on, you need to review the gases that can diffuse across a cell membrane. Because cells rapidly use
up oxygen during metabolism, there is typically a lower concentration of O2 inside the cell than outside. As a result,
oxygen will diffuse from the interstitial fluid directly through the lipid bilayer of the membrane and into the
cytoplasm within the cell. On the other hand, because cells produce CO2 as a byproduct of metabolism, CO2
concentrations rise within the cytoplasm; therefore, CO2 will move from the cell through the lipid bilayer and into the
interstitial fluid, where its concentration is lower. This mechanism of molecules moving across a cell membrane
from the side where they are more concentrated to the side where they are less concentrated is a form of passive
transport called simple diffusion (Figure 3.5).
FIGURE 3.5
Simple Diffusion across the Cell (Plasma) Membrane
The structure of the lipid bilayer allows small, uncharged
substances such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, and hydrophobic molecules such as lipids, to pass through the cell membrane, down their
concentration gradient, by simple diffusion.
Large polar or ionic molecules, which are hydrophilic, cannot easily cross the phospholipid bilayer. Very small polar
molecules, such as water, can cross via simple diffusion due to their small size. Charged atoms or molecules of any
size cannot cross the cell membrane via simple diffusion as the charges are repelled by the hydrophobic tails in the
interior of the phospholipid bilayer. Solutes dissolved in water on either side of the cell membrane will tend to
3.1 • The Cell Membrane
85
diffuse down their concentration gradients, but because most substances cannot pass freely through the lipid
bilayer of the cell membrane, their movement is restricted to protein channels and specialized transport
mechanisms in the membrane. Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion process used for those substances that cannot
cross the lipid bilayer due to their size, charge, and/or polarity (Figure 3.6). A common example of facilitated
diffusion is the movement of glucose into the cell, where it is used to make ATP. Although glucose can be more
concentrated outside of a cell, it cannot cross the lipid bilayer via simple diffusion because it is both large and polar.
To resolve this, a specialized carrier protein called the glucose transporter will transfer glucose molecules into the
cell to facilitate its inward diffusion.
FIGURE 3.6
Facilitated Diffusion
(a) Facilitated diffusion of substances crossing the cell (plasma) membrane takes place with the help
of proteins such as channel proteins and carrier proteins. Channel proteins are less selective than carrier proteins, and usually mildly
discriminate between their cargo based on size and charge. (b) Carrier proteins are more selective, often only allowing one particular type
of molecule to cross.
As an example, even though sodium ions (Na+) are highly concentrated outside of cells, these electrolytes are
charged and cannot pass through the nonpolar lipid bilayer of the membrane. Their diffusion is facilitated by
membrane proteins that form sodium channels (or “pores”), so that Na+ ions can move down their concentration
gradient from outside the cells to inside the cells. There are many other solutes that must undergo facilitated
diffusion to move into a cell, such as amino acids, or to move out of a cell, such as wastes. Because facilitated
diffusion is a passive process, it does not require energy expenditure by the cell.
Water also can move freely across the cell membrane of all cells, either through protein channels or by slipping
between the lipid tails of the membrane itself. Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable
membrane (Figure 3.7).
86
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.7
Osmosis
Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane down its concentration gradient. If a
membrane is permeable to water, though not to a solute, water will equalize its own concentration by diffusing to the side of lower water
concentration (and thus the side of higher solute concentration). In the beaker on the left, the solution on the right side of the membrane is
hypertonic.
The movement of water molecules is not itself regulated by some cells, so it is important that these cells are
exposed to an environment in which the concentration of solutes outside of the cells (in the extracellular fluid) is
equal to the concentration of solutes inside the cells (in the cytoplasm). Two solutions that have the same
concentration of solutes are said to be isotonic (equal tension). When cells and their extracellular environments are
isotonic, the concentration of water molecules is the same outside and inside the cells, and the cells maintain their
normal shape (and function).
Osmosis occurs when there is an imbalance of solutes outside of a cell versus inside the cell. A solution that has a
higher concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypertonic, and water molecules tend to diffuse
into a hypertonic solution (Figure 3.8). Cells in a hypertonic solution will shrivel as water leaves the cell via osmosis.
In contrast, a solution that has a lower concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypotonic, and
water molecules tend to diffuse out of a hypotonic solution. Cells in a hypotonic solution will take on too much water
and swell, with the risk of eventually bursting. A critical aspect of homeostasis in living things is to create an internal
environment in which all of the body’s cells are in an isotonic solution. Various organ systems, particularly the
kidneys, work to maintain this homeostasis.
FIGURE 3.8
Concentration of Solutions
A hypertonic solution has a solute concentration higher than another solution. An isotonic
solution has a solute concentration equal to another solution. A hypotonic solution has a solute concentration lower than another solution.
Another mechanism besides diffusion to passively transport materials between compartments is filtration. Unlike
diffusion of a substance from where it is more concentrated to less concentrated, filtration uses a hydrostatic
pressure gradient that pushes the fluid—and the solutes within it—from a higher pressure area to a lower pressure
area. Filtration is an extremely important process in the body. For example, the circulatory system uses filtration to
move plasma and substances across the endothelial lining of capillaries and into surrounding tissues, supplying
cells with the nutrients. Filtration pressure in the kidneys provides the mechanism to remove wastes from the
bloodstream.
Active Transport
For all of the transport methods described above, the cell expends no energy. Membrane proteins that aid in the
passive transport of substances do so without the use of ATP. During active transport, ATP is required to move a
substance across a membrane, often with the help of protein carriers, and usually against its concentration gradient.
One of the most common types of active transport involves proteins that serve as pumps. The word “pump”
probably conjures up thoughts of using energy to pump up the tire of a bicycle or a basketball. Similarly, energy from
3.1 • The Cell Membrane
87
ATP is required for these membrane proteins to transport substances—molecules or ions—across the membrane,
usually against their concentration gradients (from an area of low concentration to an area of high concentration).
The sodium-potassium pump, which is also called Na+/K+ ATPase, transports sodium out of a cell while moving
potassium into the cell. The Na+/K+ pump is an important ion pump found in the membranes of many types of cells.
These pumps are particularly abundant in nerve cells, which are constantly pumping out sodium ions and pulling in
potassium ions to maintain an electrical gradient across their cell membranes. An electrical gradient is a difference
in electrical charge across a space. In the case of nerve cells, for example, the electrical gradient exists between the
inside and outside of the cell, with the inside being negatively-charged (at around -70 mV) relative to the outside.
The negative electrical gradient is maintained because each Na+/K+ pump moves three Na+ ions out of the cell and
two K+ ions into the cell for each ATP molecule that is used (Figure 3.9). This process is so important for nerve cells
that it accounts for the majority of their ATP usage.
FIGURE 3.9
Sodium-Potassium Pump
The sodium-potassium pump is found in many cell (plasma) membranes. Powered by ATP, the
pump moves sodium and potassium ions in opposite directions, each against its concentration gradient. In a single cycle of the pump, three
sodium ions are extruded from and two potassium ions are imported into the cell.
Active transport pumps can also work together with other active or passive transport systems to move substances
across the membrane. For example, the sodium-potassium pump maintains a high concentration of sodium ions
outside of the cell. Therefore, if the cell needs sodium ions, all it has to do is open a passive sodium channel, as the
concentration gradient of the sodium ions will drive them to diffuse into the cell. In this way, the action of an active
transport pump (the sodium-potassium pump) powers the passive transport of sodium ions by creating a
concentration gradient. When active transport powers the transport of another substance in this way, it is called
secondary active transport.
Symporters are secondary active transporters that move two substances in the same direction. For example, the
sodium-glucose symporter uses sodium ions to “pull” glucose molecules into the cell. Because cells store glucose
for energy, glucose is typically at a higher concentration inside of the cell than outside. However, due to the action of
the sodium-potassium pump, sodium ions will easily diffuse into the cell when the symporter is opened. The flood of
sodium ions through the symporter provides the energy that allows glucose to move through the symporter and into
the cell, against its concentration gradient.
Conversely, antiporters are secondary active transport systems that transport substances in opposite directions. For
example, the sodium-hydrogen ion antiporter uses the energy from the inward flood of sodium ions to move
hydrogen ions (H+) out of the cell. The sodium-hydrogen antiporter is used to maintain the pH of the cell's interior.
Other forms of active transport do not involve membrane carriers. Endocytosis (bringing “into the cell”) is the
process of a cell ingesting material by enveloping it in a portion of its cell membrane, and then pinching off that
portion of membrane (Figure 3.10). Once pinched off, the portion of membrane and its contents becomes an
independent, intracellular vesicle. A vesicle is a membranous sac—a spherical and hollow organelle bounded by a
lipid bilayer membrane. Endocytosis often brings materials into the cell that must be broken down or digested.
88
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Phagocytosis (“cell eating”) is the endocytosis of large particles. Many immune cells engage in phagocytosis of
invading pathogens. Like little Pac-men, their job is to patrol body tissues for unwanted matter, such as invading
bacterial cells, phagocytize them, and digest them. In contrast to phagocytosis, pinocytosis (“cell drinking”) brings
fluid containing dissolved substances into a cell through membrane vesicles.
FIGURE 3.10
Three Forms of Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a form of active transport in which a cell envelopes extracellular materials
using its cell membrane. (a) In phagocytosis, which is relatively nonselective, the cell takes in a large particle. (b) In pinocytosis, the cell
takes in small particles in fluid. (c) In contrast, receptor-mediated endocytosis is quite selective. When external receptors bind a specific
ligand, the cell responds by endocytosing the ligand.
Phagocytosis and pinocytosis take in large portions of extracellular material, and they are typically not highly
selective in the substances they bring in. Cells regulate the endocytosis of specific substances via receptor-
mediated endocytosis. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is endocytosis by a portion of the cell membrane that
contains many receptors that are specific for a certain substance. Once the surface receptors have bound sufficient
amounts of the specific substance (the receptor’s ligand), the cell will endocytose the part of the cell membrane
containing the receptor-ligand complexes. Iron, a required component of hemoglobin, is endocytosed by red blood
cells in this way. Iron is bound to a protein called transferrin in the blood. Specific transferrin receptors on red blood
cell surfaces bind the iron-transferrin molecules, and the cell endocytoses the receptor-ligand complexes.
In contrast with endocytosis, exocytosis (taking “out of the cell”) is the process of a cell exporting material using
vesicular transport (Figure 3.11). Many cells manufacture substances that must be secreted, like a factory
manufacturing a product for export. These substances are typically packaged into membrane-bound vesicles within
the cell. When the vesicle membrane fuses with the cell membrane, the vesicle releases it contents into the
interstitial fluid. The vesicle membrane then becomes part of the cell membrane. Cells of the stomach and pancreas
produce and secrete digestive enzymes through exocytosis (Figure 3.12). Endocrine cells produce and secrete
hormones that are sent throughout the body, and certain immune cells produce and secrete large amounts of
histamine, a chemical important for immune responses.
3.1 • The Cell Membrane
89
FIGURE 3.11
Exocytosis
Exocytosis is much like endocytosis in reverse. Material destined for export is packaged into a vesicle inside
the cell. The membrane of the vesicle fuses with the cell membrane, and the contents are released into the extracellular space.
FIGURE 3.12
Pancreatic Cells' Enzyme Products
The pancreatic acinar cells produce and secrete many enzymes that digest food. The
tiny black granules in this electron micrograph are secretory vesicles filled with enzymes that will be exported from the cells via exocytosis.
LM × 2900. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/pcells) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Diseases of the…
Cell: Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (CF) affects approximately 30,000 people in the United States, with about
1,000 new cases reported each year. The genetic disease is most well known for its damage to the lungs,
causing breathing difficulties and chronic lung infections, but it also affects the liver, pancreas, and intestines.
Only about 50 years ago, the prognosis for children born with CF was very grim—a life expectancy rarely over 10
years. Today, with advances in medical treatment, many CF patients live into their 30s.
The symptoms of CF result from a malfunctioning membrane ion channel called the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR. In healthy people, the CFTR protein is an integral membrane
protein that transports Cl– ions out of the cell. In a person who has CF, the gene for the CFTR is mutated, thus,
the cell manufactures a defective channel protein that typically is not incorporated into the membrane, but is
instead degraded by the cell.
The CFTR requires ATP in order to function, making its Cl– transport a form of active transport. This
characteristic puzzled researchers for a long time because the Cl– ions are actually flowing down their
90
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
3.2 The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the cellular organelles associated with the endomembrane system,
including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes
•
Describe the structure and function of mitochondria and peroxisomes
•
Explain the three components of the cytoskeleton, including their composition and functions
Now that you have learned that the cell membrane surrounds all cells, you can dive inside of a prototypical human
cell to learn about its internal components and their functions. All living cells in multicellular organisms contain an
internal cytoplasmic compartment, and a nucleus within the cytoplasm. Cytosol, the jelly-like substance within the
cell, provides the fluid medium necessary for biochemical reactions. Eukaryotic cells, including all animal cells, also
contain various cellular organelles. An organelle (“little organ”) is one of several different types of membrane-
enclosed bodies in the cell, each performing a unique function. Just as the various bodily organs work together in
harmony to perform all of a human’s functions, the many different cellular organelles work together to keep the cell
healthy and performing all of its important functions. The organelles and cytosol, taken together, compose the cell’s
cytoplasm. The nucleus is a cell’s central organelle, which contains the cell’s DNA (Figure 3.13).
concentration gradient when transported out of cells. Active transport generally pumps ions against their
concentration gradient, but the CFTR presents an exception to this rule.
In normal lung tissue, the movement of Cl– out of the cell maintains a Cl–-rich, negatively charged environment
immediately outside of the cell. This is particularly important in the epithelial lining of the respiratory system.
Respiratory epithelial cells secrete mucus, which serves to trap dust, bacteria, and other debris. A cilium (plural
= cilia) is one of the hair-like appendages found on certain cells. Cilia on the epithelial cells move the mucus and
its trapped particles up the airways away from the lungs and toward the outside. In order to be effectively
moved upward, the mucus cannot be too viscous; rather it must have a thin, watery consistency. The transport
of Cl– and the maintenance of an electronegative environment outside of the cell attract positive ions such as
Na+ to the extracellular space. The accumulation of both Cl– and Na+ ions in the extracellular space creates
solute-rich mucus, which has a low concentration of water molecules. As a result, through osmosis, water
moves from cells and extracellular matrix into the mucus, “thinning” it out. This is how, in a normal respiratory
system, the mucus is kept sufficiently watered-down to be propelled out of the respiratory system.
If the CFTR channel is absent, Cl– ions are not transported out of the cell in adequate numbers, thus preventing
them from drawing positive ions. The absence of ions in the secreted mucus results in the lack of a normal water
concentration gradient. Thus, there is no osmotic pressure pulling water into the mucus. The resulting mucus is
thick and sticky, and the ciliated epithelia cannot effectively remove it from the respiratory system. Passageways
in the lungs become blocked with mucus, along with the debris it carries. Bacterial infections occur more easily
because bacterial cells are not effectively carried away from the lungs.
3.2 • The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
91
FIGURE 3.13
Prototypical Human Cell
While this image is not indicative of any one particular human cell, it is a prototypical example
of a cell containing the primary organelles and internal structures.
Organelles of the Endomembrane System
A set of three major organelles together form a system within the cell called the endomembrane system. These
organelles work together to perform various cellular jobs, including the task of producing, packaging, and exporting
certain cellular products. The organelles of the endomembrane system include the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi
apparatus, and vesicles.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a system of channels that is continuous with the nuclear membrane (or
“envelope”) covering the nucleus and composed of the same lipid bilayer material. The ER can be thought of as a
series of winding thoroughfares similar to the waterway canals in Venice. The ER provides passages throughout
much of the cell that function in transporting, synthesizing, and storing materials. The winding structure of the ER
results in a large membranous surface area that supports its many functions (Figure 3.14).
92
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.14
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
(a) The ER is a winding network of thin membranous sacs found in close association with
the cell nucleus. The smooth and rough endoplasmic reticula are very different in appearance and function (source: mouse tissue). (b)
Rough ER is studded with numerous ribosomes, which are sites of protein synthesis (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,000. (c) Smooth ER
synthesizes phospholipids, steroid hormones, regulates the concentration of cellular Ca++, metabolizes some carbohydrates, and breaks
down certain toxins (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,510. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School
© 2012)
Endoplasmic reticulum can exist in two forms: rough ER and smooth ER. These two types of ER perform some very
different functions and can be found in very different amounts depending on the type of cell. Rough ER (RER) is so-
called because its membrane is dotted with embedded granules—organelles called ribosomes, giving the RER a
bumpy appearance. A ribosome is an organelle that serves as the site of protein synthesis. It is composed of two
ribosomal RNA subunits that wrap around mRNA to start the process of translation, followed by protein synthesis.
Smooth ER (SER) lacks these ribosomes.
One of the main functions of the smooth ER is in the synthesis of lipids. The smooth ER synthesizes phospholipids,
the main component of biological membranes, as well as steroid hormones. For this reason, cells that produce large
quantities of such hormones, such as those of the female ovaries and male testes, contain large amounts of smooth
ER. In addition to lipid synthesis, the smooth ER also sequesters (i.e., stores) and regulates the concentration of
cellular Ca++, a function extremely important in cells of the nervous system where Ca++ is the trigger for
neurotransmitter release. The smooth ER additionally metabolizes some carbohydrates and performs a
detoxification role, breaking down certain toxins.
In contrast with the smooth ER, the primary job of the rough ER is the synthesis and modification of proteins
destined for the cell membrane or for export from the cell. For this protein synthesis, many ribosomes attach to the
ER (giving it the studded appearance of rough ER). Typically, a protein is synthesized within the ribosome and
released inside the channel of the rough ER, where sugars can be added to it (by a process called glycosylation)
before it is transported within a vesicle to the next stage in the packaging and shipping process: the Golgi apparatus.
The Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus is responsible for sorting, modifying, and shipping off the products that come from the rough
3.2 • The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
93
ER, much like a post-office. The Golgi apparatus looks like stacked flattened discs, almost like stacks of oddly
shaped pancakes. Like the ER, these discs are membranous. The Golgi apparatus has two distinct sides, each with a
different role. One side of the apparatus receives products in vesicles. These products are sorted through the
apparatus, and then they are released from the opposite side after being repackaged into new vesicles. If the
product is to be exported from the cell, the vesicle migrates to the cell surface and fuses to the cell membrane, and
the cargo is secreted (Figure 3.15).
FIGURE 3.15
Golgi Apparatus
(a) The Golgi apparatus manipulates products from the rough ER, and also produces new organelles
called lysosomes. Proteins and other products of the ER are sent to the Golgi apparatus, which organizes, modifies, packages, and tags
them. Some of these products are transported to other areas of the cell and some are exported from the cell through exocytosis. Enzymatic
proteins are packaged as new lysosomes (or packaged and sent for fusion with existing lysosomes). (b) An electron micrograph of the Golgi
apparatus.
Lysosomes
Some of the protein products packaged by the Golgi include digestive enzymes that are meant to remain inside the
cell for use in breaking down certain materials. The enzyme-containing vesicles released by the Golgi may form new
lysosomes, or fuse with existing, lysosomes. A lysosome is an organelle that contains enzymes that break down and
digest unneeded cellular components, such as a damaged organelle. (A lysosome is similar to a wrecking crew that
takes down old and unsound buildings in a neighborhood.) Autophagy (“self-eating”) is the process of a cell
digesting its own structures. Lysosomes are also important for breaking down foreign material. For example, when
certain immune defense cells (white blood cells) phagocytize bacteria, the bacterial cell is transported into a
lysosome and digested by the enzymes inside. As one might imagine, such phagocytic defense cells contain large
numbers of lysosomes.
Under certain circumstances, lysosomes perform a more grand and dire function. In the case of damaged or
unhealthy cells, lysosomes can be triggered to open up and release their digestive enzymes into the cytoplasm of
the cell, killing the cell. This “self-destruct” mechanism is called autolysis, and makes the process of cell death
controlled (a mechanism called “apoptosis”).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/endomembrane1) to learn about the endomembrane system, which includes
the rough and smooth ER and the Golgi body as well as lysosomes and vesicles. What is the primary role of the
endomembrane system?
94
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Organelles for Energy Production and Detoxification
In addition to the jobs performed by the endomembrane system, the cell has many other important functions. Just
as you must consume nutrients to provide yourself with energy, so must each of your cells take in nutrients, some of
which convert to chemical energy that can be used to power biochemical reactions. Another important function of
the cell is detoxification. Humans take in all sorts of toxins from the environment and also produce harmful
chemicals as byproducts of cellular processes. Cells called hepatocytes in the liver detoxify many of these toxins.
Mitochondria
A mitochondrion (plural = mitochondria) is a membranous, bean-shaped organelle that is the “energy transformer”
of the cell. Mitochondria consist of an outer lipid bilayer membrane as well as an additional inner lipid bilayer
membrane (Figure 3.16). The inner membrane is highly folded into winding structures with a great deal of surface
area, called cristae. It is along this inner membrane that a series of proteins, enzymes, and other molecules perform
the biochemical reactions of cellular respiration. These reactions convert energy stored in nutrient molecules (such
as glucose) into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which provides usable cellular energy to the cell. Cells use ATP
constantly, and so the mitochondria are constantly at work. Oxygen molecules are required during cellular
respiration, which is why you must constantly breathe it in. One of the organ systems in the body that uses huge
amounts of ATP is the muscular system because ATP is required to sustain muscle contraction. As a result, muscle
cells are packed full of mitochondria. Nerve cells also need large quantities of ATP to run their sodium-potassium
pumps. Therefore, an individual neuron will be loaded with over a thousand mitochondria. On the other hand, a bone
cell, which is not nearly as metabolically-active, might only have a couple hundred mitochondria.
FIGURE 3.16
Mitochondrion
The mitochondria are the energy-conversion factories of the cell. (a) A mitochondrion is composed of two
separate lipid bilayer membranes. Along the inner membrane are various molecules that work together to produce ATP, the cell’s major
energy currency. (b) An electron micrograph of mitochondria. EM × 236,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
Peroxisomes
Like lysosomes, a peroxisome is a membrane-bound cellular organelle that contains mostly enzymes (Figure 3.17).
Peroxisomes perform a couple of different functions, including lipid metabolism and chemical detoxification. In
contrast to the digestive enzymes found in lysosomes, the enzymes within peroxisomes serve to transfer hydrogen
atoms from various molecules to oxygen, producing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In this way, peroxisomes neutralize
poisons such as alcohol. In order to appreciate the importance of peroxisomes, it is necessary to understand the
concept of reactive oxygen species.
3.2 • The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
95
FIGURE 3.17
Peroxisome
Peroxisomes are membrane-bound organelles that contain an abundance of enzymes for detoxifying harmful
substances and lipid metabolism.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as peroxides and free radicals are the highly reactive products of many normal
cellular processes, including the mitochondrial reactions that produce ATP and oxygen metabolism. Examples of
ROS include the hydroxyl radical OH, H2O2, and superoxide (
). Some ROS are important for certain cellular
functions, such as cell signaling processes and immune responses against foreign substances. Free radicals are
reactive because they contain free unpaired electrons; they can easily oxidize other molecules throughout the cell,
causing cellular damage and even cell death. Free radicals are thought to play a role in many destructive processes
in the body, from cancer to coronary artery disease.
Peroxisomes, on the other hand, oversee reactions that neutralize free radicals. Peroxisomes produce large amounts
of the toxic H2O2 in the process, but peroxisomes contain enzymes that convert H2O2 into water and oxygen. These
byproducts are safely released into the cytoplasm. Like miniature sewage treatment plants, peroxisomes neutralize
harmful toxins so that they do not wreak havoc in the cells. The liver is the organ primarily responsible for
detoxifying the blood before it travels throughout the body, and liver cells contain an exceptionally high number of
peroxisomes.
Defense mechanisms such as detoxification within the peroxisome and certain cellular antioxidants serve to
neutralize many of these molecules. Some vitamins and other substances, found primarily in fruits and vegetables,
have antioxidant properties. Antioxidants work by being oxidized themselves, halting the destructive reaction
cascades initiated by the free radicals. Sometimes though, ROS accumulate beyond the capacity of such defenses.
Oxidative stress is the term used to describe damage to cellular components caused by ROS. Due to their
characteristic unpaired electrons, ROS can set off chain reactions where they remove electrons from other
molecules, which then become oxidized and reactive, and do the same to other molecules, causing a chain reaction.
ROS can cause permanent damage to cellular lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. Damaged DNA can
lead to genetic mutations and even cancer. A mutation is a change in the nucleotide sequence in a gene within a
cell’s DNA, potentially altering the protein coded by that gene. Other diseases believed to be triggered or
exacerbated by ROS include Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, arthritis,
Huntington’s disease, and schizophrenia, among many others. It is noteworthy that these diseases are largely age-
related. Many scientists believe that oxidative stress is a major contributor to the aging process.
Aging and the...
Cell: The Free Radical Theory
The free radical theory on aging was originally proposed in the 1950s, and still remains under debate. Generally
speaking, the free radical theory of aging suggests that accumulated cellular damage from oxidative stress
contributes to the physiological and anatomical effects of aging. There are two significantly different versions of
this theory: one states that the aging process itself is a result of oxidative damage, and the other states that
oxidative damage causes age-related disease and disorders. The latter version of the theory is more widely
96
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
The Cytoskeleton
Much like the bony skeleton structurally supports the human body, the cytoskeleton helps the cells to maintain their
structural integrity. The cytoskeleton is a group of fibrous proteins that provide structural support for cells, but this
is only one of the functions of the cytoskeleton. Cytoskeletal components are also critical for cell motility, cell
reproduction, and transportation of substances within the cell.
The cytoskeleton forms a complex thread-like network throughout the cell consisting of three different kinds of
protein-based filaments: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Figure 3.18). The thickest of the
three is the microtubule, a structural filament composed of subunits of a protein called tubulin. Microtubules
maintain cell shape and structure, help resist compression of the cell, and play a role in positioning the organelles
within the cell. Microtubules also make up two types of cellular appendages important for motion: cilia and flagella.
Cilia are found on many cells of the body, including the epithelial cells that line the airways of the respiratory
system. Cilia move rhythmically; they beat constantly, moving waste materials such as dust, mucus, and bacteria
upward through the airways, away from the lungs and toward the mouth. Beating cilia on cells in the female
fallopian tubes move egg cells from the ovary towards the uterus. A flagellum (plural = flagella) is an appendage
larger than a cilium and specialized for cell locomotion. The only flagellated cell in humans is the sperm cell that
must propel itself towards female egg cells.
FIGURE 3.18
The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton consists of (a) microtubules, (b) microfilaments, and (c)
intermediate filaments. The cytoskeleton plays an important role in maintaining cell shape and structure, promoting cellular movement,
and aiding cell division.
A very important function of microtubules is to set the paths (somewhat like railroad tracks) along which the genetic
material can be pulled (a process requiring ATP) during cell division, so that each new daughter cell receives the
appropriate set of chromosomes. Two short, identical microtubule structures called centrioles are found near the
nucleus of cells. A centriole can serve as the cellular origin point for microtubules extending outward as cilia or
flagella or can assist with the separation of DNA during cell division. Microtubules grow out from the centrioles by
adding more tubulin subunits, like adding additional links to a chain.
In contrast with microtubules, the microfilament is a thinner type of cytoskeletal filament (see Figure 3.18b). Actin,
accepted than the former. However, many lines of evidence suggest that oxidative damage does contribute to
the aging process. Research has shown that reducing oxidative damage can result in a longer lifespan in certain
organisms such as yeast, worms, and fruit flies. Conversely, increasing oxidative damage can shorten the
lifespan of mice and worms. Interestingly, a manipulation called calorie-restriction (moderately restricting the
caloric intake) has been shown to increase life span in some laboratory animals. It is believed that this increase
is at least in part due to a reduction of oxidative stress. However, a long-term study of primates with calorie-
restriction showed no increase in their lifespan. A great deal of additional research will be required to better
understand the link between reactive oxygen species and aging.
3.2 • The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
97
a protein that forms chains, is the primary component of these microfilaments. Actin fibers, twisted chains of actin
filaments, constitute a large component of muscle tissue and, along with the protein myosin, are responsible for
muscle contraction. Like microtubules, actin filaments are long chains of single subunits (called actin subunits). In
muscle cells, these long actin strands, called thin filaments, are “pulled” by thick filaments of the myosin protein to
contract the cell.
Actin also has an important role during cell division. When a cell is about to split in half during cell division, actin
filaments work with myosin to create a cleavage furrow that eventually splits the cell down the middle, forming two
new cells from the original cell.
The final cytoskeletal filament is the intermediate filament. As its name would suggest, an intermediate filament is
a filament intermediate in thickness between the microtubules and microfilaments (see Figure 3.18c). Intermediate
filaments are made up of long fibrous subunits of a protein called keratin that are wound together like the threads
that compose a rope. Intermediate filaments, in concert with the microtubules, are important for maintaining cell
shape and structure. Unlike the microtubules, which resist compression, intermediate filaments resist tension—the
forces that pull apart cells. There are many cases in which cells are prone to tension, such as when epithelial cells of
the skin are compressed, tugging them in different directions. Intermediate filaments help anchor organelles
together within a cell and also link cells to other cells by forming special cell-to-cell junctions.
3.3 The Nucleus and DNA Replication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and features of the nuclear membrane
•
List the contents of the nucleus
•
Explain the organization of the DNA molecule within the nucleus
•
Describe the process of DNA replication
The nucleus is the largest and most prominent of a cell’s organelles (Figure 3.19). The nucleus is generally
considered the control center of the cell because it stores all of the genetic instructions for manufacturing proteins.
Interestingly, some cells in the body, such as muscle cells, contain more than one nucleus (Figure 3.20), which is
known as multinucleated. Other cells, such as mammalian red blood cells (RBCs), do not contain nuclei at all. RBCs
eject their nuclei as they mature, making space for the large numbers of hemoglobin molecules that carry oxygen
throughout the body (Figure 3.21). Without nuclei, the life span of RBCs is short, and so the body must produce new
ones constantly.
FIGURE 3.19
The Nucleus
The nucleus is the control center of the cell. The nucleus of living cells contains the genetic material that
determines the entire structure and function of that cell.
98
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.20
Multinucleate Muscle Cell
Unlike cardiac muscle cells and smooth muscle cells, which have a single nucleus, a skeletal
muscle cell contains many nuclei, and is referred to as “multinucleated.” These muscle cells are long and fibrous (often referred to as
muscle fibers). During development, many smaller cells fuse to form a mature muscle fiber. The nuclei of the fused cells are conserved in
the mature cell, thus imparting a multinucleate characteristic to mature muscle cells. LM × 104.3. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/mnucleate) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
FIGURE 3.21
Red Blood Cell Extruding Its Nucleus
Mature red blood cells lack a nucleus. As they mature, erythroblasts extrude their
nucleus, making room for more hemoglobin. The two panels here show an erythroblast before and after ejecting its nucleus, respectively.
(credit: modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/RBC) to explore the tissue sample in greater detail.
Inside the nucleus lies the blueprint that dictates everything a cell will do and all of the products it will make. This
information is stored within DNA. The nucleus sends “commands” to the cell via molecular messengers that
translate the information from DNA. Each cell in your body (with the exception of germ cells) contains the complete
set of your DNA. When a cell divides, the DNA must be duplicated so that the each new cell receives a full
complement of DNA. The following section will explore the structure of the nucleus and its contents, as well as the
process of DNA replication.
Organization of the Nucleus and Its DNA
Like most other cellular organelles, the nucleus is surrounded by a membrane called the nuclear envelope. This
membranous covering consists of two adjacent lipid bilayers with a thin fluid space in between them. Spanning
these two bilayers are nuclear pores. A nuclear pore is a tiny passageway for the passage of proteins, RNA, and
solutes between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Proteins called pore complexes lining the nuclear pores regulate
3.3 • The Nucleus and DNA Replication
99
the passage of materials into and out of the nucleus.
Inside the nuclear envelope is a gel-like nucleoplasm with solutes that include the building blocks of nucleic acids.
There also can be a dark-staining mass often visible under a simple light microscope, called a nucleolus (plural =
nucleoli). The nucleolus is a region of the nucleus that is responsible for manufacturing the RNA necessary for
construction of ribosomes. Once synthesized, newly made ribosomal subunits exit the cell’s nucleus through the
nuclear pores.
The genetic instructions that are used to build and maintain an organism are arranged in an orderly manner in
strands of DNA. Within the nucleus are threads of chromatin composed of DNA and associated proteins (Figure
3.22). Along the chromatin threads, the DNA is wrapped around a set of histone proteins. A nucleosome is a single,
wrapped DNA-histone complex. Multiple nucleosomes along the entire molecule of DNA appear like a beaded
necklace, in which the string is the DNA and the beads are the associated histones. When a cell is in the process of
division, the chromatin condenses into chromosomes, so that the DNA can be safely transported to the “daughter
cells.” The chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins; it is the condensed form of chromatin. It is estimated
that humans have almost 22,000 genes distributed on 46 chromosomes.
FIGURE 3.22
DNA Macrostructure
Strands of DNA are wrapped around supporting histones. These proteins are increasingly bundled
and condensed into chromatin, which is packed tightly into chromosomes when the cell is ready to divide.
DNA Replication
In order for an organism to grow, develop, and maintain its health, cells must reproduce themselves by dividing to
produce two new daughter cells, each with the full complement of DNA as found in the original cell. Billions of new
cells are produced in an adult human every day. Only very few cell types in the body do not divide, including nerve
cells, skeletal muscle fibers, and cardiac muscle cells. The division time of different cell types varies. Epithelial cells
of the skin and gastrointestinal lining, for instance, divide very frequently to replace those that are constantly being
rubbed off of the surface by friction.
A DNA molecule is made of two strands that “complement” each other in the sense that the molecules that
compose the strands fit together and bind to each other, creating a double-stranded molecule that looks much like a
long, twisted ladder. This double helix can be constructed easily because the two strands are antiparallel, meaning
the two strands run in opposite directions. Each side rail of the DNA ladder is composed of alternating sugar and
phosphate groups (Figure 3.23). The two sides of the ladder are not identical, but are complementary. These two
backbones are bonded to each other across pairs of protruding bases, each bonded pair forming one “rung,” or
cross member. The four DNA bases are adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G). Because of their
shape and charge, the two bases that compose a pair always bond together. Adenine always binds with thymine, and
100
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
cytosine always binds with guanine. The particular sequence of bases along the DNA molecule determines the
genetic code. Therefore, if the two complementary strands of DNA were pulled apart, you could infer the order of the
bases in one strand from the bases in the other, complementary strand. For example, if one strand has a region with
the sequence AGTGCCT, then the sequence of the complementary strand would be TCACGGA.
FIGURE 3.23
Molecular Structure of DNA
The DNA double helix is composed of two complementary strands. The strands are bonded
together via their nitrogenous base pairs using hydrogen bonds.
DNA replication is the copying of DNA that occurs before cell division can take place. After a great deal of debate
and experimentation, the general method of DNA replication was deduced in 1958 by two scientists in California,
Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl. This method is illustrated in Figure 3.24 and described below.
3.3 • The Nucleus and DNA Replication
101
FIGURE 3.24
DNA Replication
DNA replication faithfully duplicates the entire genome of the cell. During DNA replication, a number of
different enzymes work together to pull apart the two strands so each strand can be used as a template to synthesize new complementary
strands. The two new daughter DNA molecules each contain one pre-existing strand and one newly synthesized strand. Thus, DNA
replication is said to be “semiconservative.”
Stage 1: Initiation. The two complementary strands are separated, much like unzipping a zipper. Special enzymes,
including helicase, untwist and separate the two strands of DNA.
Stage 2: Elongation. Each strand becomes a template along which a new complementary strand is built. DNA
polymerase brings in the correct bases to complement the template strand, synthesizing a new strand base by
base. A DNA polymerase is an enzyme that adds free nucleotides to the end of a chain of DNA, making a new double
strand. This growing strand continues to be built until it has fully complemented the template strand.
Stage 3: Termination. Once the two original strands are bound to their own, finished, complementary strands, DNA
replication is stopped and the two new identical DNA molecules are complete.
Each new DNA molecule contains one strand from the original molecule and one newly synthesized strand. The term
for this mode of replication is “semiconservative,” because half of the original DNA molecule is conserved in each
new DNA molecule. This process continues until the cell’s entire genome, the entire complement of an organism’s
DNA, is replicated. As you might imagine, it is very important that DNA replication take place precisely so that new
cells in the body contain the exact same genetic material as their parent cells. Mistakes made during DNA
replication, such as the accidental addition of an inappropriate nucleotide, have the potential to render a gene
dysfunctional or useless. Fortunately, there are mechanisms in place to minimize such mistakes. A DNA
proofreading process enlists the help of special enzymes that scan the newly synthesized molecule for mistakes and
corrects them. Once the process of DNA replication is complete, the cell is ready to divide. You will explore the
process of cell division later in the chapter.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/DNArep) to learn about DNA replication. DNA replication proceeds
simultaneously at several sites on the same molecule. What separates the base pair at the start of DNA replication?
102
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 Protein Synthesis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how the genetic code stored within DNA determines the protein that will form
•
Describe the process of transcription
•
Describe the process of translation
•
Discuss the function of ribosomes
It was mentioned earlier that DNA provides a “blueprint” for the cell structure and physiology. This refers to the fact
that DNA contains the information necessary for the cell to build one very important type of molecule: the protein.
Most structural components of the cell are made up, at least in part, by proteins and virtually all the functions that a
cell carries out are completed with the help of proteins. One of the most important classes of proteins is enzymes,
which help speed up necessary biochemical reactions that take place inside the cell. Some of these critical
biochemical reactions include building larger molecules from smaller components (such as occurs during DNA
replication or synthesis of microtubules) and breaking down larger molecules into smaller components (such as
when harvesting chemical energy from nutrient molecules). Whatever the cellular process may be, it is almost sure
to involve proteins. Just as the cell’s genome describes its full complement of DNA, a cell’s proteome is its full
complement of proteins. Protein synthesis begins with genes. A gene is a functional segment of DNA that provides
the genetic information necessary to build a protein. Each particular gene provides the code necessary to construct
a particular protein. Gene expression, which transforms the information coded in a gene to a final gene product,
ultimately dictates the structure and function of a cell by determining which proteins are made.
The interpretation of genes works in the following way. Recall that proteins are polymers, or chains, of many amino
acid building blocks. The sequence of bases in a gene (that is, its sequence of A, T, C, G nucleotides) translates to an
amino acid sequence. A triplet is a section of three DNA bases in a row that codes for a specific amino acid. Similar
to the way in which the three-letter code d-o-g signals the image of a dog, the three-letter DNA base code signals
the use of a particular amino acid. For example, the DNA triplet CAC (cytosine, adenine, and cytosine) specifies the
amino acid valine. Therefore, a gene, which is composed of multiple triplets in a unique sequence, provides the code
to build an entire protein, with multiple amino acids in the proper sequence (Figure 3.25). The mechanism by which
cells turn the DNA code into a protein product is a two-step process, with an RNA molecule as the intermediate.
FIGURE 3.25
The Genetic Code
DNA holds all of the genetic information necessary to build a cell’s proteins. The nucleotide sequence
of a gene is ultimately translated into an amino acid sequence of the gene’s corresponding protein.
From DNA to RNA: Transcription
DNA is housed within the nucleus, and protein synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm, thus there must be some sort
of intermediate messenger that leaves the nucleus and manages protein synthesis. This intermediate messenger is
messenger RNA (mRNA), a single-stranded nucleic acid that carries a copy of the genetic code for a single gene out
of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm where it is used to produce proteins.
There are several different types of RNA, each having different functions in the cell. The structure of RNA is similar
to DNA with a few small exceptions. For one thing, unlike DNA, most types of RNA, including mRNA, are single-
stranded and contain no complementary strand. Second, the ribose sugar in RNA contains an additional oxygen
3.4 • Protein Synthesis
103
atom compared with DNA. Finally, instead of the base thymine, RNA contains the base uracil. This means that
adenine will always pair up with uracil during the protein synthesis process.
Gene expression begins with the process called transcription, which is the synthesis of a strand of mRNA that is
complementary to the gene of interest. This process is called transcription because the mRNA is like a transcript, or
copy, of the gene’s DNA code. Transcription begins in a fashion somewhat like DNA replication, in that a region of
DNA unwinds and the two strands separate, however, only that small portion of the DNA will be split apart. The
triplets within the gene on this section of the DNA molecule are used as the template to transcribe the
complementary strand of RNA (Figure 3.26). A codon is a three-base sequence of mRNA, so-called because they
directly encode amino acids. Like DNA replication, there are three stages to transcription: initiation, elongation, and
termination.
FIGURE 3.26
Transcription: from DNA to mRNA
In the first of the two stages of making protein from DNA, a gene on the DNA
molecule is transcribed into a complementary mRNA molecule.
Stage 1: Initiation. A region at the beginning of the gene called a promoter—a particular sequence of
nucleotides—triggers the start of transcription.
Stage 2: Elongation. Transcription starts when RNA polymerase unwinds the DNA segment. One strand, referred to
as the coding strand, becomes the template with the genes to be coded. The polymerase then aligns the correct
nucleic acid (A, C, G, or U) with its complementary base on the coding strand of DNA. RNA polymerase is an enzyme
that adds new nucleotides to a growing strand of RNA. This process builds a strand of mRNA.
Stage 3: Termination. At the end of the gene, a sequence of nucleotides called the terminator sequence causes the
new RNA to fold up on itself. This fold causes the RNA to separate from the gene and from RNA polymerase, ending
transcription.
Before the mRNA molecule leaves the nucleus and proceeds to protein synthesis, it is modified in a number of ways.
For this reason, it is often called a pre-mRNA at this stage. For example, your DNA, and thus complementary mRNA,
contains long regions called non-coding regions that do not code for amino acids. Their function is still a mystery,
but the process called splicing removes these non-coding regions from the pre-mRNA transcript (Figure 3.27). A
spliceosome—a structure composed of various proteins and other molecules—attaches to the mRNA and “splices”
or cuts out the non-coding regions. The removed segment of the transcript is called an intron. The remaining exons
are pasted together. An exon is a segment of RNA that remains after splicing. Interestingly, some introns that are
removed from mRNA are not always non-coding. When different coding regions of mRNA are spliced out, different
variations of the protein will eventually result, with differences in structure and function. This process results in a
much larger variety of possible proteins and protein functions. When the mRNA transcript is ready, it travels out of
the nucleus and into the cytoplasm.
104
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.27
Splicing DNA
In the nucleus, a structure called a spliceosome cuts out introns (noncoding regions) within a pre-mRNA
transcript and reconnects the exons.
From RNA to Protein: Translation
Like translating a book from one language into another, the codons on a strand of mRNA must be translated into the
amino acid alphabet of proteins. Translation is the process of synthesizing a chain of amino acids called a
polypeptide. Translation requires two major aids: first, a “translator,” the molecule that will conduct the translation,
and second, a substrate on which the mRNA strand is translated into a new protein, like the translator’s “desk.” Both
of these requirements are fulfilled by other types of RNA. The substrate on which translation takes place is the
ribosome.
Remember that many of a cell’s ribosomes are found associated with the rough ER, and carry out the synthesis of
proteins destined for the Golgi apparatus. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is a type of RNA that, together with proteins,
composes the structure of the ribosome. Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm as two distinct components, a small and
a large subunit. When an mRNA molecule is ready to be translated, the two subunits come together and attach to
the mRNA. The ribosome provides a substrate for translation, bringing together and aligning the mRNA molecule
with the molecular “translators” that must decipher its code.
The other major requirement for protein synthesis is the translator molecules that physically “read” the mRNA
codons. Transfer RNA (tRNA) is a type of RNA that ferries the appropriate corresponding amino acids to the
ribosome, and attaches each new amino acid to the last, building the polypeptide chain one-by-one. Thus tRNA
transfers specific amino acids from the cytoplasm to a growing polypeptide. The tRNA molecules must be able to
recognize the codons on mRNA and match them with the correct amino acid. The tRNA is modified for this function.
On one end of its structure is a binding site for a specific amino acid. On the other end is a base sequence that
matches the codon specifying its particular amino acid. This sequence of three bases on the tRNA molecule is called
an anticodon. For example, a tRNA responsible for shuttling the amino acid glycine contains a binding site for
glycine on one end. On the other end it contains an anticodon that complements the glycine codon (GGA is a codon
for glycine, and so the tRNAs anticodon would read CCU). Equipped with its particular cargo and matching
anticodon, a tRNA molecule can read its recognized mRNA codon and bring the corresponding amino acid to the
growing chain (Figure 3.28).
3.4 • Protein Synthesis
105
FIGURE 3.28
Translation from RNA to Protein
During translation, the mRNA transcript is “read” by a functional complex consisting of
the ribosome and tRNA molecules. tRNAs bring the appropriate amino acids in sequence to the growing polypeptide chain by matching
their anti-codons with codons on the mRNA strand.
Much like the processes of DNA replication and transcription, translation consists of three main stages: initiation,
elongation, and termination. Initiation takes place with the binding of a ribosome to an mRNA transcript. The
elongation stage involves the recognition of a tRNA anticodon with the next mRNA codon in the sequence. Once the
anticodon and codon sequences are bound (remember, they are complementary base pairs), the tRNA presents its
amino acid cargo and the growing polypeptide strand is attached to this next amino acid. This attachment takes
place with the assistance of various enzymes and requires energy. The tRNA molecule then releases the mRNA
strand, the mRNA strand shifts one codon over in the ribosome, and the next appropriate tRNA arrives with its
matching anticodon. This process continues until the final codon on the mRNA is reached which provides a “stop”
message that signals termination of translation and triggers the release of the complete, newly synthesized protein.
Thus, a gene within the DNA molecule is transcribed into mRNA, which is then translated into a protein product
(Figure 3.29).
106
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.29
From DNA to Protein: Transcription through Translation
Transcription within the cell nucleus produces an mRNA
molecule, which is modified and then sent into the cytoplasm for translation. The transcript is decoded into a protein with the help of a
ribosome and tRNA molecules.
Commonly, an mRNA transcription will be translated simultaneously by several adjacent ribosomes. This increases
the efficiency of protein synthesis. A single ribosome might translate an mRNA molecule in approximately one
minute; so multiple ribosomes aboard a single transcript could produce multiple times the number of the same
protein in the same minute. A polyribosome is a string of ribosomes translating a single mRNA strand.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ribosome) to learn about ribosomes. The ribosome binds to the mRNA
molecule to start translation of its code into a protein. What happens to the small and large ribosomal subunits at
the end of translation?
3.5 Cell Growth and Division
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the stages of the cell cycle
•
Discuss how the cell cycle is regulated
•
Describe the implications of losing control over the cell cycle
•
Describe the stages of mitosis and cytokinesis, in order
So far in this chapter, you have read numerous times of the importance and prevalence of cell division. While there
are a few cells in the body that do not undergo cell division (such as gametes, red blood cells, most neurons, and
some muscle cells), most somatic cells divide regularly. A somatic cell is a general term for a body cell, and all
human cells, except for the cells that produce eggs and sperm (which are referred to as germ cells), are somatic
cells. Somatic cells contain two copies of each of their chromosomes (one copy received from each parent). A
homologous pair of chromosomes is the two copies of a single chromosome found in each somatic cell. The human
is a diploid organism, having 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes in each of the somatic cells. The condition of
having pairs of chromosomes is known as diploidy.
Cells in the body replace themselves over the lifetime of a person. For example, the cells lining the gastrointestinal
tract must be frequently replaced when constantly “worn off” by the movement of food through the gut. But what
triggers a cell to divide, and how does it prepare for and complete cell division? The cell cycle is the sequence of
events in the life of the cell from the moment it is created at the end of a previous cycle of cell division until it then
divides itself, generating two new cells.
3.5 • Cell Growth and Division
107
The Cell Cycle
One “turn” or cycle of the cell cycle consists of two general phases: interphase, followed by mitosis and cytokinesis.
Interphase is the period of the cell cycle during which the cell is not dividing. The majority of cells are in interphase
most of the time. Mitosis is the division of genetic material, during which the cell nucleus breaks down and two new,
fully functional, nuclei are formed. Cytokinesis divides the cytoplasm into two distinctive cells.
Interphase
A cell grows and carries out all normal metabolic functions and processes in a period called G1 (Figure 3.30). G1
phase (gap 1 phase) is the first gap, or growth phase in the cell cycle. For cells that will divide again, G1 is followed
by replication of the DNA, during the S phase. The S phase (synthesis phase) is period during which a cell replicates
its DNA.
FIGURE 3.30
Cell Cycle
The two major phases of the cell cycle include mitosis (designated M), when the cell divides, and interphase,
when the cell grows and performs all of its normal functions. Interphase is further subdivided into G1, S, and G2 phases.
After the synthesis phase, the cell proceeds through the G2 phase. The G2 phase is a second gap phase, during
which the cell continues to grow and makes the necessary preparations for mitosis. Between G1, S, and G2 phases,
cells will vary the most in their duration of the G1 phase. It is here that a cell might spend a couple of hours, or many
days. The S phase typically lasts between 8-10 hours and the G2 phase approximately 5 hours. In contrast to these
phases, the G0 phase is a resting phase of the cell cycle. Cells that have temporarily stopped dividing and are resting
(a common condition) and cells that have permanently ceased dividing (like nerve cells) are said to be in G0.
The Structure of Chromosomes
Billions of cells in the human body divide every day. During the synthesis phase (S, for DNA synthesis) of interphase,
the amount of DNA within the cell precisely doubles. Therefore, after DNA replication but before cell division, each
cell actually contains two copies of each chromosome. Each copy of the chromosome is referred to as a sister
chromatid and is physically bound to the other copy.(Note that the term "sister chromatid" is used regardless of the
sex of the person.) The centromere is the structure that attaches one sister chromatid to another. Because a human
cell has 46 chromosomes, during this phase, there are 92 chromatids (46 × 2) in the cell. Make sure not to confuse
the concept of a pair of chromatids (one chromosome and its exact copy attached during mitosis) and a homologous
pair of chromosomes (two paired chromosomes which were inherited separately, one from each parent) (Figure
3.31).
108
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.31
A Homologous Pair of Chromosomes with their Attached Sister Chromatids
The red and blue colors correspond to a
homologous pair of chromosomes. Each member of the pair was separately inherited from one parent. Each chromosome in the
homologous pair is also bound to an identical sister chromatid, which is produced by DNA replication, and results in the familiar “X” shape.
Mitosis and Cytokinesis
The mitotic phase of the cell typically takes between 1 and 2 hours. During this phase, a cell undergoes two major
processes. First, it completes mitosis, during which the contents of the nucleus are equitably pulled apart and
distributed between its two halves. Cytokinesis then occurs, dividing the cytoplasm and cell body into two new cells.
Mitosis is divided into four major stages that take place after interphase (Figure 3.32) and in the following order:
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The process is then followed by cytokinesis.
FIGURE 3.32
Cell Division: Mitosis Followed by Cytokinesis
The stages of cell division oversee the separation of identical genetic
material into two new nuclei, followed by the division of the cytoplasm.
3.5 • Cell Growth and Division
109
Prophase is the first phase of mitosis, during which the loosely packed chromatin coils and condenses into visible
chromosomes. During prophase, each chromosome becomes visible with its identical partner attached, forming the
familiar X-shape of sister chromatids. The nucleolus disappears early during this phase, and the nuclear envelope
also disintegrates.
A major occurrence during prophase concerns a very important structure that contains the origin site for
microtubule growth. Recall the cellular structures called centrioles that serve as origin points from which
microtubules extend. These tiny structures also play a very important role during mitosis. A centrosome is a pair of
centrioles together. The cell contains two centrosomes side-by-side, which begin to move apart during prophase. As
the centrosomes migrate to two different sides of the cell, microtubules begin to extend from each like long fingers
from two hands extending toward each other. The mitotic spindle is the structure composed of the centrosomes
and their emerging microtubules.
Near the end of prophase there is an invasion of the nuclear area by microtubules from the mitotic spindle. The
nuclear membrane has disintegrated, and the microtubules attach themselves to the centromeres that adjoin pairs
of sister chromatids. The kinetochore is a protein structure on the centromere that is the point of attachment
between the mitotic spindle and the sister chromatids. This stage is referred to as late prophase or “prometaphase”
to indicate the transition between prophase and metaphase.
Metaphase is the second stage of mitosis. During this stage, the sister chromatids, with their attached microtubules,
line up along a linear plane in the middle of the cell. A metaphase plate forms between the centrosomes that are
now located at either end of the cell. The metaphase plate is the name for the plane through the center of the
spindle on which the sister chromatids are positioned. The microtubules are now poised to pull apart the sister
chromatids and bring one from each pair to each side of the cell.
Anaphase is the third stage of mitosis. Anaphase takes place over a few minutes, when the pairs of sister
chromatids are separated from one another, forming individual chromosomes once again. These chromosomes are
pulled to opposite ends of the cell by their kinetochores, as the microtubules shorten. Each end of the cell receives
one partner from each pair of sister chromatids, ensuring that the two new daughter cells will contain identical
genetic material.
Telophase is the final stage of mitosis. Telophase is characterized by the formation of two new daughter nuclei at
either end of the dividing cell. These newly formed nuclei surround the genetic material, which uncoils such that the
chromosomes return to loosely packed chromatin. Nucleoli also reappear within the new nuclei, and the mitotic
spindle breaks apart, each new cell receiving its own complement of DNA, organelles, membranes, and centrioles.
At this point, the cell is already beginning to split in half as cytokinesis begins.
The cleavage furrow is a contractile band made up of microfilaments that forms around the midline of the cell
during cytokinesis. (Recall that microfilaments consist of actin.) This contractile band squeezes the two cells apart
until they finally separate. Two new cells are now formed. One of these cells (the “stem cell”) enters its own cell
cycle; able to grow and divide again at some future time. The other cell transforms into the functional cell of the
tissue, typically replacing an “old” cell there.
Imagine a cell that completed mitosis but never underwent cytokinesis. In some cases, a cell may divide its genetic
material and grow in size, but fail to undergo cytokinesis. This results in larger cells with more than one nucleus.
Usually this is an unwanted aberration and can be a sign of cancerous cells.
Cell Cycle Control
A very elaborate and precise system of regulation controls direct the way cells proceed from one phase to the next
in the cell cycle and begin mitosis. The control system involves molecules within the cell as well as external triggers.
These internal and external control triggers provide “stop” and “advance” signals for the cell. Precise regulation of
the cell cycle is critical for maintaining the health of an organism, and loss of cell cycle control can lead to cancer.
Mechanisms of Cell Cycle Control
As the cell proceeds through its cycle, each phase involves certain processes that must be completed before the cell
should advance to the next phase. A checkpoint is a point in the cell cycle at which the cycle can be signaled to
move forward or stopped. At each of these checkpoints, different varieties of molecules provide the stop or go
110
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
signals, depending on certain conditions within the cell. A cyclin is one of the primary classes of cell cycle control
molecules (Figure 3.33). A cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is one of a group of molecules that work together with
cyclins to determine progression past cell checkpoints. By interacting with many additional molecules, these
triggers push the cell cycle forward unless prevented from doing so by “stop” signals, if for some reason the cell is
not ready. At the G1 checkpoint, the cell must be ready for DNA synthesis to occur. At the G2 checkpoint the cell
must be fully prepared for mitosis. Even during mitosis, a crucial stop and go checkpoint in metaphase ensures that
the cell is fully prepared to complete cell division. The metaphase checkpoint ensures that all sister chromatids are
properly attached to their respective microtubules and lined up at the metaphase plate before the signal is given to
separate them during anaphase.
FIGURE 3.33
Control of the Cell Cycle
Cells proceed through the cell cycle under the control of a variety of molecules, such as cyclins
and cyclin-dependent kinases. These control molecules determine whether or not the cell is prepared to move into the following stage.
The Cell Cycle Out of Control: Implications
Most people understand that cancer or tumors are caused by abnormal cells that multiply continuously. If the
abnormal cells continue to divide unstopped, they can damage the tissues around them, spread to other parts of the
body, and eventually result in death. In healthy cells, the tight regulation mechanisms of the cell cycle prevent this
from happening, while failures of cell cycle control can cause unwanted and excessive cell division. Failures of
control may be caused by inherited genetic abnormalities that compromise the function of certain “stop” and “go”
signals. Environmental insult that damages DNA can also cause dysfunction in those signals. Often, a combination of
both genetic predisposition and environmental factors lead to cancer.
The process of a cell escaping its normal control system and becoming cancerous may actually happen throughout
the body quite frequently. Fortunately, certain cells of the immune system are capable of recognizing cells that have
become cancerous and destroying them. However, in certain cases the cancerous cells remain undetected and
continue to proliferate. If the resulting tumor does not pose a threat to surrounding tissues, it is said to be benign
and can usually be easily removed. If capable of damage, the tumor is considered malignant and the patient is
diagnosed with cancer.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Cancer Arises from Homeostatic Imbalances
Cancer is an extremely complex condition, capable of arising from a wide variety of genetic and environmental
causes. Typically, mutations or aberrations in a cell’s DNA that compromise normal cell cycle control systems lead
to cancerous tumors. Cell cycle control is an example of a homeostatic mechanism that maintains proper cell
function and health. While progressing through the phases of the cell cycle, a large variety of intracellular molecules
3.5 • Cell Growth and Division
111
provide stop and go signals to regulate movement forward to the next phase. These signals are maintained in an
intricate balance so that the cell only proceeds to the next phase when it is ready. This homeostatic control of the
cell cycle can be thought of like a car’s cruise control. Cruise control will continually apply just the right amount of
acceleration to maintain a desired speed, unless the driver hits the brakes, in which case the car will slow down.
Similarly, the cell includes molecular messengers, such as cyclins, that push the cell forward in its cycle.
In addition to cyclins, a class of proteins that are encoded by genes called proto-oncogenes provide important
signals that regulate the cell cycle and move it forward. Examples of proto-oncogene products include cell-surface
receptors for growth factors, or cell-signaling molecules, two classes of molecules that can promote DNA replication
and cell division. In contrast, a second class of genes known as tumor suppressor genes sends stop signals during a
cell cycle. For example, certain protein products of tumor suppressor genes signal potential problems with the DNA
and thus stop the cell from dividing, while other proteins signal the cell to die if it is damaged beyond repair. Some
tumor suppressor proteins also signal a sufficient surrounding cellular density, which indicates that the cell need not
presently divide. The latter function is uniquely important in preventing tumor growth: normal cells exhibit a
phenomenon called “contact inhibition;” thus, extensive cellular contact with neighboring cells causes a signal that
stops further cell division.
These two contrasting classes of genes, proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, are like the accelerator and
brake pedal of the cell’s own “cruise control system,” respectively. Under normal conditions, these stop and go
signals are maintained in a homeostatic balance. Generally speaking, there are two ways that the cell’s cruise
control can lose control: a malfunctioning (overactive) accelerator, or a malfunctioning (underactive) brake. When
compromised through a mutation, or otherwise altered, proto-oncogenes can be converted to oncogenes, which
produce oncoproteins that push a cell forward in its cycle and stimulate cell division even when it is undesirable to
do so. For example, a cell that should be programmed to self-destruct (a process called apoptosis) due to extensive
DNA damage might instead be triggered to proliferate by an oncoprotein. On the other hand, a dysfunctional tumor
suppressor gene may fail to provide the cell with a necessary stop signal, also resulting in unwanted cell division and
proliferation.
A delicate homeostatic balance between the many proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes delicately
controls the cell cycle and ensures that only healthy cells replicate. Therefore, a disruption of this homeostatic
balance can cause aberrant cell division and cancerous growths.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/mitosis) to learn about mitosis. Mitosis results in two identical diploid cells.
What structures forms during prophase?
3.6 Cellular Differentiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss how the generalized cells of a developing embryo or the stem cells of an adult organism become
differentiated into specialized cells
•
Distinguish between the categories of stem cells
How does a complex organism such as a human develop from a single cell—a fertilized egg—into the vast array of
cell types such as nerve cells, muscle cells, and epithelial cells that characterize the adult? Throughout
development and adulthood, the process of cellular differentiation leads cells to assume their final morphology and
physiology. Differentiation is the process by which unspecialized cells become specialized to carry out distinct
functions.
Stem Cells
A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide without limit as needed and can, under specific conditions,
differentiate into specialized cells. Stem cells are divided into several categories according to their potential to
differentiate.
112
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
The first embryonic cells that arise from the division of the zygote are the ultimate stem cells; these stems cells are
described as totipotent because they have the potential to differentiate into any of the cells needed to enable an
organism to grow and develop.
The embryonic cells that develop from totipotent stem cells and are precursors to the fundamental tissue layers of
the embryo are classified as pluripotent. A pluripotent stem cell is one that has the potential to differentiate into
any type of human tissue but cannot support the full development of an organism. These cells then become slightly
more specialized, and are referred to as multipotent cells.
A multipotent stem cell has the potential to differentiate into different types of cells within a given cell lineage or
small number of lineages, such as a red blood cell or white blood cell.
Finally, multipotent cells can become further specialized oligopotent cells. An oligopotent stem cell is limited to
becoming one of a few different cell types. In contrast, a unipotent cell is fully specialized and can only reproduce to
generate more of its own specific cell type.
Stem cells are unique in that they can also continually divide and regenerate new stem cells instead of further
specializing. There are different stem cells present at different stages of a human’s life. They include the embryonic
stem cells of the embryo, fetal stem cells of the fetus, and adult stem cells in the adult. One type of adult stem cell is
the epithelial stem cell, which gives rise to the keratinocytes in the multiple layers of epithelial cells in the epidermis
of skin. Adult bone marrow has three distinct types of stem cells: hematopoietic stem cells, which give rise to red
blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets (Figure 3.34); endothelial stem cells, which give rise to the endothelial
cell types that line blood and lymph vessels; and mesenchymal stem cells, which give rise to the different types of
muscle cells.
FIGURE 3.34
Hematopoiesis
The process of hematopoiesis involves the differentiation of multipotent cells into blood and immune
cells. The multipotent hematopoietic stem cells give rise to many different cell types, including the cells of the immune system and red
3.6 • Cellular Differentiation
113
blood cells.
Differentiation
When a cell differentiates (becomes more specialized), it may undertake major changes in its size, shape, metabolic
activity, and overall function. Because all cells in the body, beginning with the fertilized egg, contain the same DNA,
how do the different cell types come to be so different? The answer is analogous to a movie script. The different
actors in a movie all read from the same script, however, they are each only reading their own part of the script.
Similarly, all cells contain the same full complement of DNA, but each type of cell only “reads” the portions of DNA
that are relevant to its own function. In biology, this is referred to as the unique genetic expression of each cell.
In order for a cell to differentiate into its specialized form and function, it need only manipulate those genes (and
thus those proteins) that will be expressed, and not those that will remain silent. The primary mechanism by which
genes are turned “on” or “off” is through transcription factors. A transcription factor is one of a class of proteins
that bind to specific genes on the DNA molecule and either promote or inhibit their transcription (Figure 3.35).
FIGURE 3.35
Transcription Factors Regulate Gene Expression
While each body cell contains the organism’s entire genome, different
cells regulate gene expression with the use of various transcription factors. Transcription factors are proteins that affect the binding of RNA
polymerase to a particular gene on the DNA molecule.
Everyday Connection
Stem Cell Research
Stem cell research aims to find ways to use stem cells to regenerate and repair cellular damage. Over time, most
adult cells undergo the wear and tear of aging and lose their ability to divide and repair themselves. Stem cells
do not display a particular morphology or function. Adult stem cells, which exist as a small subset of cells in
most tissues, keep dividing and can differentiate into a number of specialized cells generally formed by that
tissue. These cells enable the body to renew and repair body tissues.
The mechanisms that induce a non-differentiated cell to become a specialized cell are poorly understood. In a
laboratory setting, it is possible to induce stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells by changing the
physical and chemical conditions of growth. Several sources of stem cells are used experimentally and are
classified according to their origin and potential for differentiation. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are
extracted from embryos and are pluripotent. The adult stem cells that are present in many organs and
differentiated tissues, such as bone marrow and skin, are multipotent, being limited in differentiation to the
types of cells found in those tissues. The stem cells isolated from umbilical cord blood are also multipotent, as
are cells from deciduous teeth (baby teeth). Researchers have recently developed induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) from mouse and human adult stem cells. These cells are genetically reprogrammed multipotent
adult cells that function like embryonic stem cells; they are capable of generating cells characteristic of all three
germ layers.
Because of their capacity to divide and differentiate into specialized cells, stem cells offer a potential treatment
for diseases such as diabetes and heart disease (Figure 3.36). Cell-based therapy refers to treatment in which
stem cells induced to differentiate in a growth dish are injected into a patient to repair damaged or destroyed
cells or tissues. Many obstacles must be overcome for the application of cell-based therapy. Although embryonic
stem cells have a nearly unlimited range of differentiation potential, they are seen as foreign by the patient’s
immune system and may trigger rejection. Also, the destruction of embryos to isolate embryonic stem cells
raises considerable ethical and legal questions.
114
3 • The Cellular Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 3.36
Stem Cells
The capacity of stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells make them potentially valuable in
therapeutic applications designed to replace damaged cells of different body tissues.
In contrast, adult stem cells isolated from a patient are not seen as foreign by the body, but they have a limited
range of differentiation. Some individuals bank the cord blood or deciduous teeth of their child, storing away
those sources of stem cells for future use, should their child need it. Induced pluripotent stem cells are
considered a promising advance in the field because using them avoids the legal, ethical, and immunological
pitfalls of embryonic stem cells.
3.6 • Cellular Differentiation
115
Key Terms
active transport
form of transport across the cell
membrane that requires input of cellular energy
amphipathic
describes a molecule that exhibits a
difference in polarity between its two ends,
resulting in a difference in water solubility
anaphase
third stage of mitosis (and meiosis), during
which sister chromatids separate into two new
nuclear regions of a dividing cell
anticodon
consecutive sequence of three nucleotides
on a tRNA molecule that is complementary to a
specific codon on an mRNA molecule
autolysis
breakdown of cells by their own enzymatic
action
autophagy
lysosomal breakdown of a cell’s own
components
cell cycle
life cycle of a single cell, from its birth until
its division into two new daughter cells
cell membrane
membrane surrounding all animal
cells, composed of a lipid bilayer interspersed with
various molecules; also known as plasma
membrane
centriole
small, self-replicating organelle that
provides the origin for microtubule growth and
moves DNA during cell division
centromere
region of attachment for two sister
chromatids
centrosome
cellular structure that organizes
microtubules during cell division
channel protein
membrane-spanning protein that
has an inner pore which allows the passage of one
or more substances
checkpoint
progress point in the cell cycle during
which certain conditions must be met in order for
the cell to proceed to a subsequence phase
chromatin
substance consisting of DNA and
associated proteins
chromosome
condensed version of chromatin
cilia
small appendage on certain cells formed by
microtubules and modified for movement of
materials across the cellular surface
cleavage furrow
contractile ring that forms around a
cell during cytokinesis that pinches the cell into two
halves
codon
consecutive sequence of three nucleotides on
an mRNA molecule that corresponds to a specific
amino acid
concentration gradient
difference in the
concentration of a substance between two regions
cyclin
one of a group of proteins that function in the
progression of the cell cycle
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
one of a group of
enzymes associated with cyclins that help them
perform their functions
cytokinesis
final stage in cell division, where the
cytoplasm divides to form two separate daughter
cells
cytoplasm
internal material between the cell
membrane and nucleus of a cell, mainly consisting
of a water-based fluid called cytosol, within which
are all the other organelles and cellular solute and
suspended materials
cytoskeleton
“skeleton” of a cell; formed by rod-like
proteins that support the cell’s shape and provide,
among other functions, locomotive abilities
cytosol
clear, semi-fluid medium of the cytoplasm,
made up mostly of water
diffusion
movement of a substance from an area of
higher concentration to one of lower concentration
diploid
condition marked by the presence of a double
complement of genetic material (two sets of
chromosomes, one set inherited from each of two
parents)
DNA polymerase
enzyme that functions in adding
new nucleotides to a growing strand of DNA during
DNA replication
DNA replication
process of duplicating a molecule of
DNA
electrical gradient
difference in the electrical charge
(potential) between two regions
endocytosis
import of material into the cell by
formation of a membrane-bound vesicle
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
cellular organelle that
consists of interconnected membrane-bound
tubules, which may or may not be associated with
ribosomes (rough type or smooth type, respectively)
exocytosis
export of a substance out of a cell by
formation of a membrane-bound vesicle
exon
one of the coding regions of an mRNA molecule
that remain after splicing
extracellular fluid (ECF)
fluid exterior to cells;
includes the interstitial fluid, blood plasma, and
fluid found in other reservoirs in the body
facilitated diffusion
diffusion of a substance with the
aid of a membrane protein
flagellum
appendage on certain cells formed by
microtubules and modified for movement
G0 phase
phase of the cell cycle, usually entered
from the G1 phase; characterized by long or
permanent periods where the cell does not move
forward into the DNA synthesis phase
G1 phase
first phase of the cell cycle, after a new cell
is born
G2 phase
third phase of the cell cycle, after the DNA
synthesis phase
116
3 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
gene
functional length of DNA that provides the
genetic information necessary to build a protein
gene expression
active interpretation of the
information coded in a gene to produce a functional
gene product
genome
entire complement of an organism’s DNA;
found within virtually every cell
glycocalyx
coating of sugar molecules that surrounds
the cell membrane
glycoprotein
protein that has one or more
carbohydrates attached
Golgi apparatus
cellular organelle formed by a series
of flattened, membrane-bound sacs that functions
in protein modification, tagging, packaging, and
transport
helicase
enzyme that functions to separate the two
DNA strands of a double helix during DNA
replication
histone
family of proteins that associate with DNA in
the nucleus to form chromatin
homologous
describes two copies of the same
chromosome (not identical), one inherited from
each parent
hydrophilic
describes a substance or structure
attracted to water
hydrophobic
describes a substance or structure
repelled by water
hypertonic
describes a solution concentration that is
higher than a reference concentration
hypotonic
describes a solution concentration that is
lower than a reference concentration
integral protein
membrane-associated protein that
spans the entire width of the lipid bilayer
intermediate filament
type of cytoskeletal filament
made of keratin, characterized by an intermediate
thickness, and playing a role in resisting cellular
tension
interphase
entire life cycle of a cell, excluding mitosis
interstitial fluid (IF)
fluid in the small spaces
between cells not contained within blood vessels
intracellular fluid (ICF)
fluid in the cytosol of cells
intron
non-coding regions of a pre-mRNA transcript
that may be removed during splicing
isotonic
describes a solution concentration that is the
same as a reference concentration
kinetochore
region of a centromere where
microtubules attach to a pair of sister chromatids
ligand
molecule that binds with specificity to a
specific receptor molecule
lysosome
membrane-bound cellular organelle
originating from the Golgi apparatus and containing
digestive enzymes
messenger RNA (mRNA)
nucleotide molecule that
serves as an intermediate in the genetic code
between DNA and protein
metaphase
second stage of mitosis (and meiosis),
characterized by the linear alignment of sister
chromatids in the center of the cell
metaphase plate
linear alignment of sister
chromatids in the center of the cell, which takes
place during metaphase
microfilament
the thinnest of the cytoskeletal
filaments; composed of actin subunits that function
in muscle contraction and cellular structural support
microtubule
the thickest of the cytoskeletal
filaments, composed of tubulin subunits that
function in cellular movement and structural
support
mitochondrion
one of the cellular organelles bound
by a double lipid bilayer that function primarily in
the production of cellular energy (ATP)
mitosis
division of genetic material, during which the
cell nucleus breaks down and two new, fully
functional, nuclei are formed
mitotic phase
phase of the cell cycle in which a cell
undergoes mitosis
mitotic spindle
network of microtubules, originating
from centrioles, that arranges and pulls apart
chromosomes during mitosis
multipotent
describes the condition of being able to
differentiate into different types of cells within a
given cell lineage or small number of lineages, such
as a red blood cell or white blood cell
mutation
change in the nucleotide sequence in a
gene within a cell’s DNA
nuclear envelope
membrane that surrounds the
nucleus; consisting of a double lipid-bilayer
nuclear pore
one of the small, protein-lined openings
found scattered throughout the nuclear envelope
nucleolus
small region of the nucleus that functions
in ribosome synthesis
nucleosome
unit of chromatin consisting of a DNA
strand wrapped around histone proteins
nucleus
cell’s central organelle; contains the cell’s
DNA
oligopotent
describes the condition of being more
specialized than multipotency; the condition of
being able to differentiate into one of a few possible
cell types
organelle
any of several different types of
membrane-enclosed specialized structures in the
cell that perform specific functions for the cell
osmosis
diffusion of water molecules down their
concentration gradient across a selectively
permeable membrane
passive transport
form of transport across the cell
3 • Key Terms
117
membrane that does not require input of cellular
energy
peripheral protein
membrane-associated protein
that does not span the width of the lipid bilayer, but
is attached peripherally to integral proteins,
membrane lipids, or other components of the
membrane
peroxisome
membrane-bound organelle that
contains enzymes primarily responsible for
detoxifying harmful substances
phagocytosis
endocytosis of large particles
pinocytosis
endocytosis of fluid
pluripotent
describes the condition of being able to
differentiate into a large variety of cell types
polypeptide
chain of amino acids linked by peptide
bonds
polyribosome
simultaneous translation of a single
mRNA transcript by multiple ribosomes
promoter
region of DNA that signals transcription to
begin at that site within the gene
prophase
first stage of mitosis (and meiosis),
characterized by breakdown of the nuclear envelope
and condensing of the chromatin to form
chromosomes
proteome
full complement of proteins produced by a
cell (determined by the cell’s specific gene
expression)
reactive oxygen species (ROS)
a group of extremely
reactive peroxides and oxygen-containing radicals
that may contribute to cellular damage
receptor
protein molecule that contains a binding site
for another specific molecule (called a ligand)
receptor-mediated endocytosis
endocytosis of
ligands attached to membrane-bound receptors
ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
RNA that makes up the
subunits of a ribosome
ribosome
cellular organelle that functions in protein
synthesis
RNA polymerase
enzyme that unwinds DNA and then
adds new nucleotides to a growing strand of RNA for
the transcription phase of protein synthesis
S phase
stage of the cell cycle during which DNA
replication occurs
selective permeability
feature of any barrier that
allows certain substances to cross but excludes
others
sister chromatid
one of a pair of identical
chromosomes, formed during DNA replication
sodium-potassium pump
(also, Na+/K+ ATP-ase)
membrane-embedded protein pump that uses ATP
to move Na+ out of a cell and K+ into the cell
somatic cell
all cells of the body excluding gamete
cells
spliceosome
complex of enzymes that serves to
splice out the introns of a pre-mRNA transcript
splicing
the process of modifying a pre-mRNA
transcript by removing certain, typically non-coding,
regions
stem cell
cell that is oligo-, multi-, or pleuripotent
that has the ability to produce additional stem cells
rather than becoming further specialized
telophase
final stage of mitosis (and meiosis),
preceding cytokinesis, characterized by the
formation of two new daughter nuclei
totipotent
embryonic cells that have the ability to
differentiate into any type of cell and organ in the
body
transcription
process of producing an mRNA
molecule that is complementary to a particular gene
of DNA
transcription factor
one of the proteins that regulate
the transcription of genes
transfer RNA (tRNA)
molecules of RNA that serve to
bring amino acids to a growing polypeptide strand
and properly place them into the sequence
translation
process of producing a protein from the
nucleotide sequence code of an mRNA transcript
triplet
consecutive sequence of three nucleotides on
a DNA molecule that, when transcribed into an
mRNA codon, corresponds to a particular amino
acid
unipotent
describes the condition of being
committed to a single specialized cell type
vesicle
membrane-bound structure that contains
materials within or outside of the cell
Chapter Review
3.1 The Cell Membrane
The cell membrane provides a barrier around the cell,
separating its internal components from the
extracellular environment. It is composed of a
phospholipid bilayer, with hydrophobic internal lipid
“tails” and hydrophilic external phosphate “heads.”
Various membrane proteins are scattered throughout
the bilayer, both inserted within it and attached to it
peripherally. The cell membrane is selectively
permeable, allowing only a limited number of materials
to diffuse through its lipid bilayer. All materials that
cross the membrane do so using passive (non energy-
requiring) or active (energy-requiring) transport
processes. During passive transport, materials move by
simple diffusion or by facilitated diffusion through the
membrane, down their concentration gradient. Water
118
3 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
passes through the membrane in a diffusion process
called osmosis. During active transport, energy is
expended to assist material movement across the
membrane in a direction against their concentration
gradient. Active transport may take place with the help
of protein pumps or through the use of vesicles.
3.2 The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
The internal environmental of a living cell is made up of
a fluid, jelly-like substance called cytosol, which
consists mainly of water, but also contains various
dissolved nutrients and other molecules. The cell
contains an array of cellular organelles, each one
performing a unique function and helping to maintain
the health and activity of the cell. The cytosol and
organelles together compose the cell’s cytoplasm.
Most organelles are surrounded by a lipid membrane
similar to the cell membrane of the cell. The
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus, and
lysosomes share a functional connectivity and are
collectively referred to as the endomembrane system.
There are two types of ER: smooth and rough. While
the smooth ER performs many functions, including lipid
synthesis and ion storage, the rough ER is mainly
responsible for protein synthesis using its associated
ribosomes. The rough ER sends newly made proteins
to the Golgi apparatus where they are modified and
packaged for delivery to various locations within or
outside of the cell. Some of these protein products are
enzymes destined to break down unwanted material
and are packaged as lysosomes for use inside the cell.
Cells also contain mitochondria and peroxisomes,
which are the organelles responsible for producing the
cell’s energy supply and detoxifying certain chemicals,
respectively. Biochemical reactions within
mitochondria transform energy-carrying molecules into
the usable form of cellular energy known as ATP.
Peroxisomes contain enzymes that transform harmful
substances such as free radicals into oxygen and water.
Cells also contain a miniaturized “skeleton” of protein
filaments that extend throughout its interior. Three
different kinds of filaments compose this cytoskeleton
(in order of increasing thickness): microfilaments,
intermediate filaments, and microtubules. Each
cytoskeletal component performs unique functions as
well as provides a supportive framework for the cell.
3.3 The Nucleus and DNA Replication
The nucleus is the command center of the cell,
containing the genetic instructions for all of the
materials a cell will make (and thus all of its functions it
can perform). The nucleus is encased within a
membrane of two interconnected lipid bilayers, side-
by-side. This nuclear envelope is studded with protein-
lined pores that allow materials to be trafficked into
and out of the nucleus. The nucleus contains one or
more nucleoli, which serve as sites for ribosome
synthesis. The nucleus houses the genetic material of
the cell: DNA. DNA is normally found as a loosely
contained structure called chromatin within the
nucleus, where it is wound up and associated with a
variety of histone proteins. When a cell is about to
divide, the chromatin coils tightly and condenses to
form chromosomes.
There is a pool of cells constantly dividing within your
body. The result is billions of new cells being created
each day. Before any cell is ready to divide, it must
replicate its DNA so that each new daughter cell will
receive an exact copy of the organism’s genome. A
variety of enzymes are enlisted during DNA replication.
These enzymes unwind the DNA molecule, separate
the two strands, and assist with the building of
complementary strands along each parent strand. The
original DNA strands serve as templates from which
the nucleotide sequence of the new strands are
determined and synthesized. When replication is
completed, two identical DNA molecules exist. Each
one contains one original strand and one newly
synthesized complementary strand.
3.4 Protein Synthesis
DNA stores the information necessary for instructing
the cell to perform all of its functions. Cells use the
genetic code stored within DNA to build proteins,
which ultimately determine the structure and function
of the cell. This genetic code lies in the particular
sequence of nucleotides that make up each gene along
the DNA molecule. To “read” this code, the cell must
perform two sequential steps. In the first step,
transcription, the DNA code is converted into an RNA
code. A molecule of messenger RNA that is
complementary to a specific gene is synthesized in a
process similar to DNA replication. The molecule of
mRNA provides the code to synthesize a protein. In the
process of translation, the mRNA attaches to a
ribosome. Next, tRNA molecules shuttle the
appropriate amino acids to the ribosome, one-by-one,
coded by sequential triplet codons on the mRNA, until
the protein is fully synthesized. When completed, the
mRNA detaches from the ribosome, and the protein is
released. Typically, multiple ribosomes attach to a
single mRNA molecule at once such that multiple
proteins can be manufactured from the mRNA
concurrently.
3 • Chapter Review
119
3.5 Cell Growth and Division
The life of cell consists of stages that make up the cell
cycle. After a cell is born, it passes through an
interphase before it is ready to replicate itself and
produce daughter cells. This interphase includes two
gap phases (G1 and G2), as well as an S phase, during
which its DNA is replicated in preparation for cell
division. The cell cycle is under precise regulation by
chemical messengers both inside and outside the cell
that provide “stop” and “go” signals for movement
from one phase to the next. Failures of these signals
can result in cells that continue to divide
uncontrollably, which can lead to cancer.
Once a cell has completed interphase and is ready for
cell division, it proceeds through four separate stages
of mitosis (prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase). Telophase is followed by the division of the
cytoplasm (cytokinesis), which generates two daughter
cells. This process takes place in all normally dividing
cells of the body except for the germ cells that produce
eggs and sperm.
3.6 Cellular Differentiation
One of the major areas of research in biology is that of
how cells specialize to assume their unique structures
and functions, since all cells essentially originate from
a single fertilized egg. Cell differentiation is the process
of cells becoming specialized as they body develops. A
stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide
without limit as needed and can, under specific
conditions, differentiate into specialized cells. Stem
cells are divided into several categories according to
their potential to differentiate. While all somatic cells
contain the exact same genome, different cell types
only express some of those genes at any given time.
These differences in gene expression ultimately dictate
a cell’s unique morphological and physiological
characteristics. The primary mechanism that
determines which genes will be expressed and which
ones will not is through the use of different
transcription factor proteins, which bind to DNA and
promote or hinder the transcription of different genes.
Through the action of these transcription factors, cells
specialize into one of hundreds of different cell types in
the human body.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/diffusion) to see
diffusion and how it is propelled by the kinetic
energy of molecules in solution. How does
temperature affect diffusion rate, and why?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
endomembrane1) to learn about the
endomembrane system, which includes the rough
and smooth ER and the Golgi body as well as
lysosomes and vesicles. What is the primary role of
the endomembrane system?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/DNArep) to
learn about DNA replication. DNA replication
proceeds simultaneously at several sites on the
same molecule. What separates the base pair at the
start of DNA replication?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ribosome)
to learn about ribosomes. The ribosome binds to
the mRNA molecule to start translation of its code
into a protein. What happens to the small and large
ribosomal subunits at the end of translation?
5. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/mitosis) to learn
about mitosis. Mitosis results in two identical
diploid cells. What structures form during
prophase?
Review Questions
6. Because they are embedded within the membrane,
ion channels are examples of ________.
a.
receptor proteins
b.
integral proteins
c.
peripheral proteins
d.
glycoproteins
7. The diffusion of substances within a solution tends
to move those substances ________ their
________ gradient.
a.
up; electrical
b.
up; electrochemical
c.
down; pressure
d.
down; concentration
120
3 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
8. Ion pumps and phagocytosis are both examples of
________.
a.
endocytosis
b.
passive transport
c.
active transport
d.
facilitated diffusion
9. Choose the answer that best completes the
following analogy: Diffusion is to ________ as
endocytosis is to ________.
a.
filtration; phagocytosis
b.
osmosis; pinocytosis
c.
solutes; fluid
d.
gradient; chemical energy
10. Choose the term that best completes the following
analogy: Cytoplasm is to cytosol as a swimming
pool containing chlorine and flotation toys is to
________.
a.
the walls of the pool
b.
the chlorine
c.
the flotation toys
d.
the water
11. The rough ER has its name due to what associated
structures?
a.
Golgi apparatus
b.
ribosomes
c.
lysosomes
d.
proteins
12. Which of the following is a function of the rough
ER?
a.
production of proteins
b.
detoxification of certain substances
c.
synthesis of steroid hormones
d.
regulation of intracellular calcium
concentration
13. Which of the following is a feature common to all
three components of the cytoskeleton?
a.
They all serve to scaffold the organelles
within the cell.
b.
They are all characterized by roughly the
same diameter.
c.
They are all polymers of protein subunits.
d.
They all help the cell resist compression and
tension.
14. Which of the following organelles produces large
quantities of ATP when both glucose and oxygen
are available to the cell?
a.
mitochondria
b.
peroxisomes
c.
lysosomes
d.
ER
15. The nucleus and mitochondria share which of the
following features?
a.
protein-lined membrane pores
b.
a double cell membrane
c.
the synthesis of ribosomes
d.
the production of cellular energy
16. Which of the following structures could be found
within the nucleolus?
a.
chromatin
b.
histones
c.
ribosomes
d.
nucleosomes
17. Which of the following sequences on a DNA
molecule would be complementary to GCTTATAT?
a.
TAGGCGCG
b.
ATCCGCGC
c.
CGAATATA
d.
TGCCTCTC
18. Place the following structures in order from least
to most complex organization: chromatin,
nucleosome, DNA, chromosome
a.
DNA, nucleosome, chromatin, chromosome
b.
nucleosome, DNA, chromosome, chromatin
c.
DNA, chromatin, nucleosome, chromosome
d.
nucleosome, chromatin, DNA, chromosome
19. Which of the following is part of the elongation
step of DNA synthesis?
a.
pulling apart the two DNA strands
b.
attaching complementary nucleotides to the
template strand
c.
untwisting the DNA helix
d.
none of the above
20. Which of the following is not a difference between
DNA and RNA?
a.
DNA contains thymine whereas RNA contains
uracil
b.
DNA contains deoxyribose and RNA contains
ribose
c.
DNA contains alternating sugar-phosphate
molecules whereas RNA does not contain
sugars
d.
RNA is single stranded and DNA is double
stranded
21. Transcription and translation take place in the
________ and ________, respectively.
a.
nucleus; cytoplasm
b.
nucleolus; nucleus
c.
nucleolus; cytoplasm
d.
cytoplasm; nucleus
3 • Review Questions
121
22. How many “letters” of an RNA molecule, in
sequence, does it take to provide the code for a
single amino acid?
a.
1
b.
2
c.
3
d.
4
23. Which of the following is not made out of RNA?
a.
the carriers that shuffle amino acids to a
growing polypeptide strand
b.
the ribosome
c.
the messenger molecule that provides the
code for protein synthesis
d.
the intron
24. Which of the following phases is characterized by
preparation for DNA synthesis?
a.
G0
b.
G1
c.
G2
d.
S
25. A mutation in the gene for a cyclin protein might
result in which of the following?
a.
a cell with additional genetic material than
normal
b.
cancer
c.
a cell with less genetic material than normal
d.
any of the above
26. What is a primary function of tumor suppressor
genes?
a.
stop all cells from dividing
b.
stop certain cells from dividing
c.
help oncogenes produce oncoproteins
d.
allow the cell to skip certain phases of the cell
cycle
27. Arrange the following terms in order of increasing
specialization: oligopotency, pleuripotency,
unipotency, multipotency.
a.
multipotency, pleuripotency, oligopotency,
unipotency
b.
pleuripotency, oligopotency, multipotency
unipotency
c.
oligopotency, pleuripotency, unipotency,
multipotency
d.
pleuripotency, multipotency, oligopotency,
unipotency
28. Which type of stem cell gives rise to red and white
blood cells?
a.
endothelial
b.
epithelial
c.
hematopoietic
d.
mesenchymal
29. What multipotent stem cells from children
sometimes banked by parents?
a.
fetal stem cells
b.
embryonic stem cells
c.
cells from the umbilical cord and from baby
teeth
d.
hematopoietic stem cells from red and white
blood cells
Critical Thinking Questions
30. What materials can easily diffuse through the lipid
bilayer, and why?
31. Why is receptor-mediated endocytosis said to be
more selective than phagocytosis or pinocytosis?
32. What do osmosis, diffusion, filtration, and the
movement of ions away from like charge all have
in common? In what way do they differ?
33. Explain why the structure of the ER, mitochondria,
and Golgi apparatus assist their respective
functions.
34. Compare and contrast lysosomes with
peroxisomes: name at least two similarities and
one difference.
35. Explain in your own words why DNA replication is
said to be “semiconservative”?
36. Why is it important that DNA replication take place
before cell division? What would happen if cell
division of a body cell took place without DNA
replication, or when DNA replication was
incomplete?
37. Briefly explain the similarities between
transcription and DNA replication.
38. Contrast transcription and translation. Name at
least three differences between the two
processes.
39. What would happen if anaphase proceeded even
though the sister chromatids were not properly
attached to their respective microtubules and
lined up at the metaphase plate?
40. What are cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases,
and how do they interact?
122
3 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
41. Explain how a transcription factor ultimately
determines whether or not a protein will be
present in a given cell?
42. Discuss two reasons why the therapeutic use of
embryonic stem cells can present a problem.
3 • Critical Thinking Questions
123
124
3 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 4
The Tissue Level of Organization
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the main tissue types and discuss their roles in the human body
•
Identify the four types of tissue membranes and the characteristics of each that make them functional
•
Explain the functions of various epithelial tissues and how their forms enable their functions
•
Explain the functions of various connective tissues and how their forms enable their functions
•
Describe the characteristics of muscle tissue and how these enable function
•
Discuss the characteristics of nervous tissue and how these enable information processing and control of
muscular and glandular activities
The body contains at least 200 distinct cell types. These cells contain essentially the same
internal structures yet they vary enormously in shape and function. The different types of cells are not randomly
distributed throughout the body; rather they occur in organized layers, a level of organization referred to as tissue.
The micrograph that opens this chapter shows the high degree of organization among different types of cells in the
tissue of the cervix. You can also see how that organization breaks down when cancer takes over the regular mitotic
functioning of a cell.
The variety in shape reflects the many different roles that cells fulfill in your body. The human body starts as a single
cell at fertilization. As this fertilized egg divides, it gives rise to trillions of cells, each built from the same blueprint,
but organizing into tissues and becoming irreversibly committed to a developmental pathway.
Figure 4.1
Micrograph of Cervical Tissue This figure is a view of the regular architecture of normal tissue contrasted with the irregular
arrangement of cancerous cells. (credit: “Haymanj”/Wikimedia Commons)
4.1 Types of Tissues
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the four main tissue types
•
Discuss the functions of each tissue type
•
Relate the structure of each tissue type to their function
•
Discuss the embryonic origin of tissue
•
Identify the three major germ layers
•
Identify the main types of tissue membranes
The term tissue is used to describe a group of cells found together in the body. The cells within a tissue share a
common embryonic origin. Microscopic observation reveals that the cells in a tissue share morphological features
and are arranged in an orderly pattern that achieves the tissue’s functions. From the evolutionary perspective,
tissues appear in more complex organisms. For example, multicellular protists, ancient eukaryotes, do not have
cells organized into tissues.
Although there are many types of cells in the human body, they are organized into four broad categories of tissues:
epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. Each of these categories is characterized by specific functions that
contribute to the overall health and maintenance of the body. A disruption of the structure is a sign of injury or
disease. Such changes can be detected through histology, the microscopic study of tissue appearance, organization,
and function.
The Four Types of Tissues
Epithelial tissue, also referred to as epithelium, refers to the sheets of cells that cover exterior surfaces of the body,
line internal cavities and passageways, and form certain glands. Connective tissue, as its name implies, binds the
cells and organs of the body together and functions in the protection, support, and integration of all parts of the
body. Muscle tissue is excitable, responding to stimulation and contracting to provide movement, and occurs as
three major types: skeletal (voluntary) muscle, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle in the heart. Nervous tissue is
also excitable, allowing the propagation of electrochemical signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate
between different regions of the body (Figure 4.2).
The next level of organization is the organ, where several types of tissues come together to form a working unit. Just
as knowing the structure and function of cells helps you in your study of tissues, knowledge of tissues will help you
understand how organs function. The epithelial and connective tissues are discussed in detail in this chapter. Muscle
and nervous tissues will be discussed only briefly in this chapter.
126
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.2
Four Types of Tissue: Body
The four types of tissues are exemplified in nervous tissue, stratified squamous epithelial
tissue, cardiac muscle tissue, and connective tissue. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
2012)
Embryonic Origin of Tissues
The zygote, or fertilized egg, is a single cell formed by the fusion of an egg and sperm. After fertilization the zygote
gives rise to rapid mitotic cycles, generating many cells to form the embryo. The first embryonic cells generated
have the ability to differentiate into any type of cell in the body and, as such, are called totipotent, meaning each
has the capacity to divide, differentiate, and develop into a new organism. As cell proliferation progresses, three
major cell lineages are established within the embryo. As explained in a later chapter, each of these lineages of
embryonic cells forms the distinct germ layers from which all the tissues and organs of the human body eventually
form. Each germ layer is identified by its relative position: ectoderm (ecto- = “outer”), mesoderm (meso- =
“middle”), and endoderm (endo- = “inner”). Figure 4.3 shows the types of tissues and organs associated with the
each of the three germ layers. Note that epithelial tissue originates in all three layers, whereas nervous tissue
derives primarily from the ectoderm and muscle tissue from mesoderm.
4.1 • Types of Tissues
127
FIGURE 4.3
Embryonic Origin of Tissues and Major Organs
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this slideshow (http://openstax.org/l/stemcells) to learn more about stem cells. How do somatic stem cells
differ from embryonic stem cells?
Tissue Membranes
A tissue membrane is a thin layer or sheet of cells that covers the outside of the body (for example, skin), the
organs (for example, pericardium), internal passageways that lead to the exterior of the body (for example, mucosa
of stomach), and the lining of the moveable joint cavities. There are two basic types of tissue membranes:
connective tissue and epithelial membranes (Figure 4.4).
128
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.4
Tissue Membranes
The two broad categories of tissue membranes in the body are (1) connective tissue membranes,
which include synovial membranes, and (2) epithelial membranes, which include mucous membranes, serous membranes, and the
cutaneous membrane, in other words, the skin.
Connective Tissue Membranes
The connective tissue membrane is formed solely from connective tissue. These membranes encapsulate organs,
such as the kidneys, and line our movable joints. A synovial membrane is a type of connective tissue membrane
that lines the cavity of a freely movable joint. For example, synovial membranes surround the joints of the shoulder,
elbow, and knee. Fibroblasts in the inner layer of the synovial membrane release hyaluronan into the joint cavity.
The hyaluronan effectively traps available water to form the synovial fluid, a natural lubricant that enables the bones
of a joint to move freely against one another without much friction. This synovial fluid readily exchanges water and
nutrients with blood, as do all body fluids.
Epithelial Membranes
The epithelial membrane is composed of epithelium attached to a layer of connective tissue, for example, your
skin. The mucous membrane is also a composite of connective and epithelial tissues. Sometimes called mucosae,
these epithelial membranes line the body cavities and hollow passageways that open to the external environment,
and include the digestive, respiratory, excretory, and reproductive tracts. Mucus, produced by the epithelial exocrine
4.1 • Types of Tissues
129
glands, covers the epithelial layer. The underlying connective tissue, called the lamina propria (literally “own
layer”), help support the fragile epithelial layer.
A serous membrane is an epithelial membrane composed of mesodermally derived epithelium called the
mesothelium that is supported by connective tissue. These membranes line the coelomic cavities of the body, that
is, those cavities that do not open to the outside, and they cover the organs located within those cavities. They are
essentially membranous bags, with mesothelium lining the inside and connective tissue on the outside. Serous fluid
secreted by the cells of the thin squamous mesothelium lubricates the membrane and reduces abrasion and friction
between organs. Serous membranes are identified according locations. Three serous membranes line the thoracic
cavity; the two pleura that cover the lungs and the pericardium that covers the heart. A fourth, the peritoneum, is
the serous membrane in the abdominal cavity that covers abdominal organs and forms double sheets of
mesenteries that suspend many of the digestive organs.
The skin is an epithelial membrane also called the cutaneous membrane. It is a stratified squamous epithelial
membrane resting on top of connective tissue. The apical surface of this membrane is exposed to the external
environment and is covered with dead, keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and pathogens.
4.2 Epithelial Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the structure and function of epithelial tissue
•
Distinguish between tight junctions, anchoring junctions, and gap junctions
•
Distinguish between simple epithelia and stratified epithelia, as well as between squamous, cuboidal, and
columnar epithelia
•
Describe the structure and function of endocrine and exocrine glands and their respective secretions
Most epithelial tissues are essentially large sheets of cells covering all the surfaces of the body exposed to the
outside world and lining the outside of organs. Epithelium also forms much of the glandular tissue of the body. Skin
is not the only area of the body exposed to the outside. Other areas include the airways, the digestive tract, as well
as the urinary and reproductive systems, all of which are lined by an epithelium. Hollow organs and body cavities
that do not connect to the exterior of the body, which includes, blood vessels and serous membranes, are lined by
endothelium (plural = endothelia), which is a type of epithelium.
Epithelial cells derive from all three major embryonic layers. The epithelia lining the skin, parts of the mouth and
nose, and the anus develop from the ectoderm. Cells lining the airways and most of the digestive system originate in
the endoderm. The epithelium that lines vessels in the lymphatic and cardiovascular system derives from the
mesoderm and is called an endothelium.
All epithelia share some important structural and functional features. This tissue is highly cellular, with little or no
extracellular material present between cells. Adjoining cells form a specialized intercellular connection between
their cell membranes called a cell junction. The epithelial cells exhibit polarity with differences in structure and
function between the exposed or apical facing surface of the cell and the basal surface close to the underlying body
structures. The basal lamina, a mixture of glycoproteins and collagen, provides an attachment site for the
epithelium, separating it from underlying connective tissue. The basal lamina attaches to a reticular lamina, which
is secreted by the underlying connective tissue, forming a basement membrane that helps hold it all together.
Epithelial tissues are nearly completely avascular. For instance, no blood vessels cross the basement membrane to
enter the tissue, and nutrients must come by diffusion or absorption from underlying tissues or the surface. Many
epithelial tissues are capable of rapidly replacing damaged and dead cells. Sloughing off of damaged or dead cells is
a characteristic of surface epithelium and allows our airways and digestive tracts to rapidly replace damaged cells
with new cells.
Generalized Functions of Epithelial Tissue
Epithelial tissues provide the body’s first line of protection from physical, chemical, and biological wear and tear.
The cells of an epithelium act as gatekeepers of the body controlling permeability and allowing selective transfer of
materials across a physical barrier. All substances that enter the body must cross an epithelium. Some epithelia
130
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
often include structural features that allow the selective transport of molecules and ions across their cell
membranes.
Many epithelial cells are capable of secretion and release mucous and specific chemical compounds onto their
apical surfaces. The epithelium of the small intestine releases digestive enzymes, for example. Cells lining the
respiratory tract secrete mucous that traps incoming microorganisms and particles. A glandular epithelium contains
many secretory cells.
The Epithelial Cell
Epithelial cells are typically characterized by the polarized distribution of organelles and membrane-bound proteins
between their basal and apical surfaces. Particular structures found in some epithelial cells are an adaptation to
specific functions. Certain organelles are segregated to the basal sides, whereas other organelles and extensions,
such as cilia, when present, are on the apical surface.
Cilia are microscopic extensions of the apical cell membrane that are supported by microtubules. They beat in
unison and move fluids as well as trapped particles. Ciliated epithelium lines the ventricles of the brain where it
helps circulate the cerebrospinal fluid. The ciliated epithelium of your airway forms a mucociliary escalator that
sweeps particles of dust and pathogens trapped in the secreted mucous toward the throat. It is called an escalator
because it continuously pushes mucous with trapped particles upward. In contrast, nasal cilia sweep the mucous
blanket down towards your throat. In both cases, the transported materials are usually swallowed, and end up in the
acidic environment of your stomach.
Cell to Cell Junctions
Cells of epithelia are closely connected and are not separated by intracellular material. Three basic types of
connections allow varying degrees of interaction between the cells: tight junctions, anchoring junctions, and gap
junctions (Figure 4.5).
4.2 • Epithelial Tissue
131
FIGURE 4.5
Types of Cell Junctions
The three basic types of cell-to-cell junctions are tight junctions, gap junctions, and anchoring
junctions.
At one end of the spectrum is the tight junction, which separates the cells into apical and basal compartments.
When two adjacent epithelial cells form a tight junction, there is no extracellular space between them and the
movement of substances through the extracellular space between the cells is blocked. This enables the epithelia to
act as selective barriers. An anchoring junction includes several types of cell junctions that help stabilize epithelial
tissues. Anchoring junctions are common on the lateral and basal surfaces of cells where they provide strong and
flexible connections. There are three types of anchoring junctions: desmosomes, hemidesmosomes, and adherens.
Desmosomes occur in patches on the membranes of cells. The patches are structural proteins on the inner surface
of the cell’s membrane. The adhesion molecule, cadherin, is embedded in these patches and projects through the
cell membrane to link with the cadherin molecules of adjacent cells. These connections are especially important in
holding cells together. Hemidesmosomes, which look like half a desmosome, link cells to the extracellular matrix,
for example, the basal lamina. While similar in appearance to desmosomes, they include the adhesion proteins
called integrins rather than cadherins. Adherens junctions use either cadherins or integrins depending on whether
they are linking to other cells or matrix. The junctions are characterized by the presence of the contractile protein
actin located on the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane. The actin can connect isolated patches or form a
belt-like structure inside the cell. These junctions influence the shape and folding of the epithelial tissue.
In contrast with the tight and anchoring junctions, a gap junction forms an intercellular passageway between the
132
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
membranes of adjacent cells to facilitate the movement of small molecules and ions between the cytoplasm of
adjacent cells. These junctions allow electrical and metabolic coupling of adjacent cells, which coordinates function
in large groups of cells.
Classification of Epithelial Tissues
Epithelial tissues are classified according to the shape of the cells and number of the cell layers formed (Figure 4.6).
Cell shapes can be squamous (flattened and thin), cuboidal (boxy, as wide as it is tall), or columnar (rectangular,
taller than it is wide). Similarly, the number of cell layers in the tissue can be one—where every cell rests on the
basal lamina—which is a simple epithelium, or more than one, which is a stratified epithelium and only the basal
layer of cells rests on the basal lamina. Pseudostratified (pseudo- = “false”) describes tissue with a single layer of
irregularly shaped cells that give the appearance of more than one layer. Transitional describes a form of specialized
stratified epithelium in which the shape of the cells can vary.
FIGURE 4.6
Cells of Epithelial Tissue
Simple epithelial tissue is organized as a single layer of cells and stratified epithelial tissue is
formed by several layers of cells.
Simple Epithelium
The shape of the cells in the single cell layer of simple epithelium reflects the functioning of those cells. The cells in
simple squamous epithelium have the appearance of thin scales. Squamous cell nuclei tend to be flat, horizontal,
and elliptical, mirroring the form of the cell. The endothelium is the epithelial tissue that lines vessels of the
lymphatic and cardiovascular system, and it is made up of a single layer of squamous cells. Simple squamous
epithelium, because of the thinness of the cell, is present where rapid passage of chemical compounds is observed.
The alveoli of lungs where gases diffuse, segments of kidney tubules, and the lining of capillaries are also made of
simple squamous epithelial tissue. The mesothelium is a simple squamous epithelium that forms the surface layer
of the serous membrane that lines body cavities and internal organs. Its primary function is to provide a smooth and
protective surface. Mesothelial cells are squamous epithelial cells that secrete a fluid that lubricates the
mesothelium.
In simple cuboidal epithelium, the nucleus of the box-like cells appears round and is generally located near the
center of the cell. These epithelia are active in the secretion and absorptions of molecules. Simple cuboidal epithelia
4.2 • Epithelial Tissue
133
are observed in the lining of the kidney tubules and in the ducts of glands.
In simple columnar epithelium, the nucleus of the tall column-like cells tends to be elongated and located in the
basal end of the cells. Like the cuboidal epithelia, this epithelium is active in the absorption and secretion of
molecules. Simple columnar epithelium forms the lining of some sections of the digestive system and parts of the
female reproductive tract. Ciliated columnar epithelium is composed of simple columnar epithelial cells with cilia on
their apical surfaces. These epithelial cells are found in the lining of the fallopian tubes and parts of the respiratory
system, where the beating of the cilia helps remove particulate matter.
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is a type of epithelium that appears to be stratified but instead consists of a
single layer of irregularly shaped and differently sized columnar cells. In pseudostratified epithelium, nuclei of
neighboring cells appear at different levels rather than clustered in the basal end. The arrangement gives the
appearance of stratification; but in fact all the cells are in contact with the basal lamina, although some do not reach
the apical surface. Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is found in the respiratory tract, where some of these cells
have cilia.
Both simple and pseudostratified columnar epithelia are heterogeneous epithelia because they include additional
types of cells interspersed among the epithelial cells. For example, a goblet cell is a mucous-secreting unicellular
“gland” interspersed between the columnar epithelial cells of mucous membranes (Figure 4.7).
134
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.7
Goblet Cell
(a) In the lining of the small intestine, columnar epithelium cells are interspersed with goblet cells. (b) The
arrows in this micrograph point to the mucous-secreting goblet cells. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/goblet) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Stratified Epithelium
A stratified epithelium consists of several stacked layers of cells. This epithelium protects against physical and
chemical wear and tear. The stratified epithelium is named by the shape of the most apical layer of cells, closest to
the free space. Stratified squamous epithelium is the most common type of stratified epithelium in the human
body. The apical cells are squamous, whereas the basal layer contains either columnar or cuboidal cells. The top
layer may be covered with dead cells filled with keratin. Mammalian skin is an example of this dry, keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium. The lining of the mouth cavity is an example of an unkeratinized, stratified
squamous epithelium. Stratified cuboidal epithelium and stratified columnar epithelium can also be found in
certain glands and ducts, but are uncommon in the human body.
Another kind of stratified epithelium is transitional epithelium, so-called because of the gradual changes in the
shapes of the apical cells as the bladder fills with urine. It is found only in the urinary system, specifically the ureters
and urinary bladder. When the bladder is empty, this epithelium is convoluted and has cuboidal apical cells with
convex, umbrella shaped, apical surfaces. As the bladder fills with urine, this epithelium loses its convolutions and
the apical cells transition from cuboidal to squamous. It appears thicker and more multi-layered when the bladder is
empty, and more stretched out and less stratified when the bladder is full and distended. Figure 4.8 summarizes the
different categories of epithelial cell tissue cells.
4.2 • Epithelial Tissue
135
FIGURE 4.8
Summary of Epithelial Tissue Cells
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/etissues) to find out more about the anatomy of epithelial tissues. Where in
the body would one find non-keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium?
136
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Glandular Epithelium
A gland is a structure made up of one or more cells modified to synthesize and secrete chemical substances. Most
glands consist of groups of epithelial cells. A gland can be classified as an endocrine gland, a ductless gland that
releases secretions directly into surrounding tissues and fluids (endo- = “inside”), or an exocrine gland whose
secretions leave through a duct that opens directly, or indirectly, to the external environment (exo- = “outside”).
Endocrine Glands
The secretions of endocrine glands are called hormones. Hormones are released into the interstitial fluid, diffused
into the bloodstream, and delivered to targets, in other words, cells that have receptors to bind the hormones. The
endocrine system is part of a major regulatory system coordinating the regulation and integration of body
responses. A few examples of endocrine glands include the anterior pituitary, thymus, adrenal cortex, and gonads.
Exocrine Glands
Exocrine glands release their contents through a duct that leads to the epithelial surface. Mucous, sweat, saliva, and
breast milk are all examples of secretions from exocrine glands. They are all discharged through tubular ducts.
Secretions into the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract, technically outside of the body, are of the exocrine category.
Glandular Structure
Exocrine glands are classified as either unicellular or multicellular. The unicellular glands are scattered single cells,
such as goblet cells, found in the mucous membranes of the small and large intestine.
The multicellular exocrine glands known as serous glands develop from simple epithelium to form a secretory
surface that secretes directly into an inner cavity. These glands line the internal cavities of the abdomen and chest
and release their secretions directly into the cavities. Other multicellular exocrine glands release their contents
through a tubular duct. The duct is single in a simple gland but in compound glands is divided into one or more
branches (Figure 4.9). In tubular glands, the ducts can be straight or coiled, whereas tubes that form pockets are
alveolar (acinar), such as the exocrine portion of the pancreas. Combinations of tubes and pockets are known as
tubuloalveolar (tubuloacinar) compound glands. In a branched gland, a duct is connected to more than one
secretory group of cells.
4.2 • Epithelial Tissue
137
FIGURE 4.9
Types of Exocrine Glands
Exocrine glands are classified by their structure.
Methods and Types of Secretion
Exocrine glands can be classified by their mode of secretion and the nature of the substances released, as well as by
the structure of the glands and shape of ducts (Figure 4.10). Merocrine secretion is the most common type of
exocrine secretion. The secretions are enclosed in vesicles that move to the apical surface of the cell where the
contents are released by exocytosis. For example, watery mucous containing the glycoprotein mucin, a lubricant
that offers some pathogen protection is a merocrine secretion. The eccrine glands that produce and secrete sweat
are another example.
138
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.10
Modes of Glandular Secretion
(a) In merocrine secretion, the cell remains intact. (b) In apocrine secretion, the apical
portion of the cell is released, as well. (c) In holocrine secretion, the cell is destroyed as it releases its product and the cell itself becomes
part of the secretion.
Apocrine secretion accumulates near the apical portion of the cell. That portion of the cell and its secretory
contents pinch off from the cell and are released. Apocrine sweat glands in the axillary and genital areas release
fatty secretions that local bacteria break down; this causes body odor. Both merocrine and apocrine glands continue
to produce and secrete their contents with little damage caused to the cell because the nucleus and golgi regions
remain intact after secretion.
In contrast, the process of holocrine secretion involves the rupture and destruction of the entire gland cell. The cell
accumulates its secretory products and releases them only when it bursts. New gland cells differentiate from cells
in the surrounding tissue to replace those lost by secretion. The sebaceous glands that produce the oils on the skin
and hair are holocrine glands/cells (Figure 4.11).
4.2 • Epithelial Tissue
139
FIGURE 4.11
Sebaceous Glands
These glands secrete oils that lubricate and protect the skin. They are holocrine glands and they are
destroyed after releasing their contents. New glandular cells form to replace the cells that are lost. LM × 400. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Glands are also named after the products they produce. The serous gland produces watery, blood-plasma-like
secretions rich in enzymes such as alpha amylase, whereas the mucous gland releases watery to viscous products
rich in the glycoprotein mucin. Both serous and mucous glands are common in the salivary glands of the mouth.
Mixed exocrine glands contain both serous and mucous glands and release both types of secretions.
4.3 Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify and distinguish between the types of connective tissue: proper, supportive, and fluid
•
Explain the functions of connective tissues
As may be obvious from its name, one of the major functions of connective tissue is to connect tissues and organs.
Unlike epithelial tissue, which is composed of cells closely packed with little or no extracellular space in between,
connective tissue cells are dispersed in a matrix. The matrix usually includes a large amount of extracellular
material produced by the connective tissue cells that are embedded within it. The matrix plays a major role in the
functioning of this tissue. The major component of the matrix is a ground substance often crisscrossed by protein
fibers. This ground substance is usually a fluid, but it can also be mineralized and solid, as in bones. Connective
tissues come in a vast variety of forms, yet they typically have in common three characteristic components: cells,
large amounts of amorphous ground substance, and protein fibers. The amount and structure of each component
correlates with the function of the tissue, from the rigid ground substance in bones supporting the body to the
inclusion of specialized cells; for example, a phagocytic cell that engulfs pathogens and also rids tissue of cellular
debris.
Functions of Connective Tissues
Connective tissues perform many functions in the body, but most importantly, they support and connect other
tissues; from the connective tissue sheath that surrounds muscle cells, to the tendons that attach muscles to bones,
and to the skeleton that supports the positions of the body. Protection is another major function of connective
tissue, in the form of fibrous capsules and bones that protect delicate organs and, of course, the skeletal system.
Specialized cells in connective tissue defend the body from microorganisms that enter the body. Transport of fluid,
nutrients, waste, and chemical messengers is ensured by specialized fluid connective tissues, such as blood and
lymph. Adipose cells store surplus energy in the form of fat and contribute to the thermal insulation of the body.
Embryonic Connective Tissue
All connective tissues derive from the mesodermal layer of the embryo (see Figure 4.3). The first connective tissue
140
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
to develop in the embryo is mesenchyme, the stem cell line from which all connective tissues are later derived.
Clusters of mesenchymal cells are scattered throughout adult tissue and supply the cells needed for replacement
and repair after a connective tissue injury. A second type of embryonic connective tissue forms in the umbilical cord,
called mucous connective tissue or Wharton’s jelly. This tissue is no longer present after birth, leaving only
scattered mesenchymal cells throughout the body.
Classification of Connective Tissues
The three broad categories of connective tissue are classified according to the characteristics of their ground
substance and the types of fibers found within the matrix (Table 4.1). Connective tissue proper includes loose
connective tissue and dense connective tissue. Both tissues have a variety of cell types and protein fibers
suspended in a viscous ground substance. Dense connective tissue is reinforced by bundles of fibers that provide
tensile strength, elasticity, and protection. In loose connective tissue, the fibers are loosely organized, leaving large
spaces in between. Supportive connective tissue—bone and cartilage—provide structure and strength to the body
and protect soft tissues. A few distinct cell types and densely packed fibers in a matrix characterize these tissues. In
bone, the matrix is rigid and described as calcified because of the deposited calcium salts. In fluid connective
tissue, in other words, lymph and blood, various specialized cells circulate in a watery fluid containing salts,
nutrients, and dissolved proteins.
Connective Tissue Examples
Connective tissue proper
Supportive connective tissue
Fluid connective tissue
Loose connective tissue
•
Areolar
•
Adipose
•
Reticular
Dense connective tissue
•
Dense regular
•
Elastic
•
Dense-irregular
Cartilage
•
Hyaline
•
Fibrocartilage
•
Elastic
Bone
Blood
Lymph
TABLE 4.1
Connective Tissue Proper
Fibroblasts are present in all connective tissue proper (Figure 4.12). Fibrocytes, adipocytes, and mesenchymal cells
are fixed cells, which means they remain within the connective tissue. Other cells move in and out of the connective
tissue in response to chemical signals. Macrophages, mast cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and phagocytic cells
are found in connective tissue proper but are actually part of the immune system protecting the body.
FIGURE 4.12
Connective Tissue Proper
Fibroblasts produce this fibrous tissue. Connective tissue proper includes the fixed cells
fibrocytes, adipocytes, and mesenchymal cells. LM × 400. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
4.3 • Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
141
2012)
Cell Types
The most abundant cell in connective tissue proper is the fibroblast. Polysaccharides and proteins secreted by
fibroblasts combine with extra-cellular fluids to produce a viscous ground substance that, with embedded fibrous
proteins, forms the extra-cellular matrix. As you might expect, a fibrocyte, a less active form of fibroblast, is the
second most common cell type in connective tissue proper.
Adipocytes are cells that store lipids as droplets that fill most of the cytoplasm. There are two basic types of
adipocytes: white and brown. The brown adipocytes store lipids as many droplets, and have high metabolic activity.
In contrast, white fat adipocytes store lipids as a single large drop and are metabolically less active. Their
effectiveness at storing large amounts of fat is witnessed in obese individuals. The number and type of adipocytes
depends on the tissue and location, and vary among individuals in the population.
The mesenchymal cell is a multipotent adult stem cell. These cells can differentiate into any type of connective
tissue cells needed for repair and healing of damaged tissue.
The macrophage cell is a large cell derived from a monocyte, a type of blood cell, which enters the connective tissue
matrix from the blood vessels. The macrophage cells are an essential component of the immune system, which is
the body’s defense against potential pathogens and degraded host cells. When stimulated, macrophages release
cytokines, small proteins that act as chemical messengers. Cytokines recruit other cells of the immune system to
infected sites and stimulate their activities. Roaming, or free, macrophages move rapidly by amoeboid movement,
engulfing infectious agents and cellular debris. In contrast, fixed macrophages are permanent residents of their
tissues.
The mast cell, found in connective tissue proper, has many cytoplasmic granules. These granules contain the
chemical signals histamine and heparin. When irritated or damaged, mast cells release histamine, an inflammatory
mediator, which causes vasodilation and increased blood flow at a site of injury or infection, along with itching,
swelling, and redness you recognize as an allergic response. Like blood cells, mast cells are derived from
hematopoietic stem cells and are part of the immune system.
Connective Tissue Fibers and Ground Substance
Three main types of fibers are secreted by fibroblasts: collagen fibers, elastic fibers, and reticular fibers. Collagen
fiber is made from fibrous protein subunits linked together to form a long and straight fiber. Collagen fibers, while
flexible, have great tensile strength, resist stretching, and give ligaments and tendons their characteristic resilience
and strength. These fibers hold connective tissues together, even during the movement of the body.
Elastic fiber contains the protein elastin along with lesser amounts of other proteins and glycoproteins. The main
property of elastin is that after being stretched or compressed, it will return to its original shape. Elastic fibers are
prominent in elastic tissues found in skin and the elastic ligaments of the vertebral column.
Reticular fiber is also formed from the same protein subunits as collagen fibers; however, these fibers remain
narrow and are arrayed in a branching network. They are found throughout the body, but are most abundant in the
reticular tissue of soft organs, such as liver and spleen, where they anchor and provide structural support to the
parenchyma (the functional cells, blood vessels, and nerves of the organ).
All of these fiber types are embedded in ground substance. Secreted by fibroblasts, ground substance is made of
polysaccharides, specifically hyaluronic acid, and proteins. These combine to form a proteoglycan with a protein
core and polysaccharide branches. The proteoglycan attracts and traps available moisture forming the clear,
viscous, colorless matrix you now know as ground substance.
Loose Connective Tissue
Loose connective tissue is found between many organs where it acts both to absorb shock and bind tissues
together. It allows water, salts, and various nutrients to diffuse through to adjacent or imbedded cells and tissues.
Adipose tissue consists mostly of fat storage cells, with little extracellular matrix (Figure 4.13). A large number of
capillaries allow rapid storage and mobilization of lipid molecules. White adipose tissue is most abundant. It can
appear yellow and owes its color to carotene and related pigments from plant food. White fat contributes mostly to
lipid storage and can serve as insulation from cold temperatures and mechanical injuries. White adipose tissue can
142
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
be found protecting the kidneys and cushioning the back of the eye. Brown adipose tissue is more common in
infants, hence the term “baby fat.” In adults, there is a reduced amount of brown fat and it is found mainly in the
neck and clavicular regions of the body. The many mitochondria in the cytoplasm of brown adipose tissue help
explain its efficiency at metabolizing stored fat. Brown adipose tissue is thermogenic, meaning that as it breaks
down fats, it releases metabolic heat, rather than producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a key molecule used in
metabolism.
FIGURE 4.13
Adipose Tissue
This is a loose connective tissue that consists of fat cells with little extracellular matrix. It stores fat for
energy and provides insulation. LM × 800. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Areolar tissue shows little specialization. It contains all the cell types and fibers previously described and is
distributed in a random, web-like fashion. It fills the spaces between muscle fibers, surrounds blood and lymph
vessels, and supports organs in the abdominal cavity. Areolar tissue underlies most epithelia and represents the
connective tissue component of epithelial membranes, which are described further in a later section.
Reticular tissue is a mesh-like, supportive framework for soft organs such as lymphatic tissue, the spleen, and the
liver (Figure 4.14). Reticular cells produce the reticular fibers that form the network onto which other cells attach. It
derives its name from the Latin reticulus, which means “little net.”
FIGURE 4.14
Reticular Tissue
This is a loose connective tissue made up of a network of reticular fibers that provides a supportive
framework for soft organs. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Dense Connective Tissue
Dense connective tissue contains more collagen fibers than does loose connective tissue. As a consequence, it
displays greater resistance to stretching. There are two major categories of dense connective tissue: regular and
irregular. Dense regular connective tissue fibers are parallel to each other, enhancing tensile strength and resistance
to stretching in the direction of the fiber orientations. Ligaments and tendons are made of dense regular connective
tissue, but in ligaments not all fibers are parallel. Dense regular elastic tissue contains elastin fibers in addition to
collagen fibers, which allows the ligament to return to its original length after stretching. The ligaments in the vocal
folds and between the vertebrae in the vertebral column are elastic.
In dense irregular connective tissue, the direction of fibers is random. This arrangement gives the tissue greater
strength in all directions and less strength in one particular direction. In some tissues, fibers crisscross and form a
mesh. In other tissues, stretching in several directions is achieved by alternating layers where fibers run in the same
4.3 • Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
143
orientation in each layer, and it is the layers themselves that are stacked at an angle. The dermis of the skin is an
example of dense irregular connective tissue rich in collagen fibers. Dense irregular elastic tissues give arterial walls
the strength and the ability to regain original shape after stretching (Figure 4.15).
FIGURE 4.15
Dense Connective Tissue
(a) Dense regular connective tissue consists of collagenous fibers packed into parallel bundles.
(b) Dense irregular connective tissue consists of collagenous fibers interwoven into a mesh-like network. From top, LM × 1000, LM × 200.
(Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Connective Tissue: Tendinitis
Your opponent stands ready as you prepare to hit the serve, but you are confident that you will smash the ball
past your opponent. As you toss the ball high in the air, a burning pain shoots across your wrist and you drop the
tennis racket. That dull ache in the wrist that you ignored through the summer is now an unbearable pain. The
game is over for now.
After examining your swollen wrist, the doctor in the emergency room announces that you have developed wrist
tendinitis. She recommends icing the tender area, taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication to ease
the pain and to reduce swelling, and complete rest for a few weeks. She interrupts your protests that you cannot
stop playing. She issues a stern warning about the risk of aggravating the condition and the possibility of surgery.
She consoles you by mentioning that well known tennis players such as Venus and Serena Williams and Rafael
Nadal have also suffered from tendinitis related injuries.
What is tendinitis and how did it happen? Tendinitis is the inflammation of a tendon, the thick band of fibrous
connective tissue that attaches a muscle to a bone. The condition causes pain and tenderness in the area
around a joint. On rare occasions, a sudden serious injury will cause tendinitis. Most often, the condition results
from repetitive motions over time that strain the tendons needed to perform the tasks.
Persons whose jobs and hobbies involve performing the same movements over and over again are often at the
greatest risk of tendinitis. You hear of tennis and golfer’s elbow, jumper's knee, and swimmer’s shoulder. In all
cases, overuse of the joint causes a microtrauma that initiates the inflammatory response. Tendinitis is routinely
diagnosed through a clinical examination. In case of severe pain, X-rays can be examined to rule out the
possibility of a bone injury. Severe cases of tendinitis can even tear loose a tendon. Surgical repair of a tendon is
painful. Connective tissue in the tendon does not have abundant blood supply and heals slowly.
144
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/tendonitis) to learn more about tendonitis, a painful condition caused by
swollen or injured tendons.
Supportive Connective Tissues
Two major forms of supportive connective tissue, cartilage and bone, allow the body to maintain its posture and
protect internal organs.
Cartilage
The distinctive appearance of cartilage is due to polysaccharides called chondroitin sulfates, which bind with ground
substance proteins to form proteoglycans. Embedded within the cartilage matrix are chondrocytes, or cartilage
cells, and the space they occupy are called lacunae (singular = lacuna). A layer of dense irregular connective tissue,
the perichondrium, encapsulates the cartilage. Cartilaginous tissue is avascular, thus all nutrients need to diffuse
through the matrix to reach the chondrocytes. This is a factor contributing to the very slow healing of cartilaginous
tissues.
The three main types of cartilage tissue are hyaline cartilage, fibrocartilage, and elastic cartilage (Figure 4.16).
Hyaline cartilage, the most common type of cartilage in the body, consists of short and dispersed collagen fibers
and contains large amounts of proteoglycans. Under the microscope, tissue samples appear clear. The surface of
hyaline cartilage is smooth. Both strong and flexible, it is found in the rib cage and nose and covers bones where
they meet to form moveable joints. It makes up a template of the embryonic skeleton before bone formation. A
plate of hyaline cartilage at the ends of bone allows continued growth until adulthood. Fibrocartilage is tough
because it has thick bundles of collagen fibers dispersed through its matrix. Menisci in the knee joint and the
intervertebral discs are examples of fibrocartilage. Elastic cartilage contains elastic fibers as well as collagen and
proteoglycans. This tissue gives rigid support as well as elasticity. Tug gently at your ear lobes, and notice that the
lobes return to their initial shape. The external ear contains elastic cartilage.
While older adults are at risk for tendinitis because the elasticity of tendon tissue decreases with age, active
people of all ages can develop tendinitis. Young athletes, dancers, and computer operators; anyone who
performs the same movements constantly is at risk for tendinitis. Although repetitive motions are unavoidable in
many activities and may lead to tendinitis, precautions can be taken that can lessen the probability of
developing tendinitis. For active individuals, stretches before exercising and cross training or changing exercises
are recommended. For the passionate athlete, it may be time to take some lessons to improve technique. All of
the preventive measures aim to increase the strength of the tendon and decrease the stress put on it. With
proper rest and managed care, you will be back on the court to hit that slice-spin serve over the net.
4.3 • Connective Tissue Supports and Protects
145
FIGURE 4.16
Types of Cartilage
Cartilage is a connective tissue consisting of collagenous fibers embedded in a firm matrix of
chondroitin sulfates. (a) Hyaline cartilage provides support with some flexibility. The example is from dog tissue. (b) Fibrocartilage provides
some compressibility and can absorb pressure. (c) Elastic cartilage provides firm but elastic support. From top, LM × 300, LM × 1200, LM ×
1016. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Bone
Bone is the hardest connective tissue. It provides protection to internal organs and supports the body. Bone’s rigid
extracellular matrix contains mostly collagen fibers embedded in a mineralized ground substance containing
hydroxyapatite, a form of calcium phosphate. Both components of the matrix, organic and inorganic, contribute to
the unusual properties of bone. Without collagen, bones would be brittle and shatter easily. Without mineral
crystals, bones would flex and provide little support. Osteocytes, bone cells like chondrocytes, are located within
lacunae. The histology of transverse tissue from long bone shows a typical arrangement of osteocytes in concentric
circles around a central canal. Bone is a highly vascularized tissue. Unlike cartilage, bone tissue can recover from
injuries in a relatively short time.
Cancellous bone looks like a sponge under the microscope and contains empty spaces between trabeculae, or
arches of bone proper. It is lighter than compact bone and found in the interior of some bones and at the end of long
bones. Compact bone is solid and has greater structural strength.
Fluid Connective Tissue
Blood and lymph are fluid connective tissues. Cells circulate in a liquid extracellular matrix. The formed elements
146
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
circulating in blood are all derived from hematopoietic stem cells located in bone marrow (Figure 4.17).
Erythrocytes, red blood cells, transport oxygen and some carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, are
responsible for defending against potentially harmful microorganisms or molecules. Platelets are cell fragments
involved in blood clotting. Some white blood cells have the ability to cross the endothelial layer that lines blood
vessels and enter adjacent tissues. Nutrients, salts, and wastes are dissolved in the liquid matrix and transported
through the body.
Lymph contains a liquid matrix and white blood cells. Lymphatic capillaries are extremely permeable, allowing larger
molecules and excess fluid from interstitial spaces to enter the lymphatic vessels. Lymph drains into blood vessels,
delivering molecules to the blood that could not otherwise directly enter the bloodstream. In this way, specialized
lymphatic capillaries transport absorbed fats away from the intestine and deliver these molecules to the blood.
FIGURE 4.17
Blood: A Fluid Connective Tissue
Blood is a fluid connective tissue containing erythrocytes and various types of
leukocytes that circulate in a liquid extracellular matrix. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan Webscope (http://openstax.org/l/cardiovascular) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
4.4 Muscle Tissue and Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the three types of muscle tissue
•
Compare and contrast the functions of each muscle tissue type
•
Explain how muscle tissue can enable motion
Muscle tissue is characterized by properties that allow movement. Muscle cells are excitable; they respond to a
stimulus. They are contractile, meaning they can shorten and generate a pulling force. When attached between two
movable objects, in other words, bones, contractions of the muscles cause the bones to move. Some muscle
movement is voluntary, which means it is under conscious control. For example, a person decides to open a book
and read a chapter on anatomy. Other movements are involuntary, meaning they are not under conscious control,
such as the contraction of your pupil in bright light. Muscle tissue is classified into three types according to structure
and function: skeletal, cardiac, and smooth (Table 4.2).
4.4 • Muscle Tissue and Motion
147
Comparison of Structure and Properties of Muscle Tissue Types
Tissue
Histology
Function
Location
Skeletal
Long cylindrical fiber,
striated, many
peripherally located
nuclei
Voluntary movement, produces heat, protects
organs
Attached to bones and
around entrance points
to body (e.g., mouth,
anus)
Cardiac
Short, branched,
striated, single central
nucleus
Contracts to pump blood
Heart
Smooth
Short, spindle-shaped,
no evident striation,
single nucleus in each
fiber
Involuntary movement, moves food,
involuntary control of respiration, moves
secretions, regulates flow of blood in arteries
by contraction
Walls of major organs
and passageways
TABLE 4.2
Skeletal muscle is attached to bones and its contraction makes possible locomotion, facial expressions, posture,
and other voluntary movements of the body. Forty percent of your body mass is made up of skeletal muscle.
Skeletal muscles generate heat as a byproduct of their contraction and thus participate in thermal homeostasis.
Shivering is an involuntary contraction of skeletal muscles in response to perceived lower than normal body
temperature. The muscle cell, or myocyte, develops from myoblasts derived from the mesoderm. Myocytes and
their numbers remain relatively constant throughout life. Skeletal muscle tissue is arranged in bundles surrounded
by connective tissue. Under the light microscope, muscle cells appear striated with many nuclei squeezed along the
membranes. The striation is due to the regular alternation of the contractile proteins actin and myosin, along with
the structural proteins that couple the contractile proteins to connective tissues. The cells are multinucleated as a
result of the fusion of the many myoblasts that fuse to form each long muscle fiber.
Cardiac muscle forms the contractile walls of the heart. The cells of cardiac muscle, known as cardiomyocytes, also
appear striated under the microscope. Unlike skeletal muscle fibers, cardiomyocytes are single cells typically with a
single centrally located nucleus. A principal characteristic of cardiomyocytes is that they contract on their own
intrinsic rhythms without any external stimulation. Cardiomyocyte attach to one another with specialized cell
junctions called intercalated discs. Intercalated discs have both anchoring junctions and gap junctions. Attached
cells form long, branching cardiac muscle fibers that are, essentially, a mechanical and electrochemical syncytium
allowing the cells to synchronize their actions. The cardiac muscle pumps blood through the body and is under
involuntary control. The attachment junctions hold adjacent cells together across the dynamic pressures changes of
the cardiac cycle.
Smooth muscle tissue contraction is responsible for involuntary movements in the internal organs. It forms the
contractile component of the digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems as well as the airways and arteries. Each
cell is spindle shaped with a single nucleus and no visible striations (Figure 4.18).
148
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.18
Muscle Tissue
(a) Skeletal muscle cells have prominent striation and nuclei on their periphery. (b) Smooth muscle cells
have a single nucleus and no visible striations. (c) Cardiac muscle cells appear striated and have a single nucleus. (Micrographs provided by
the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/musctissue) to learn more about muscle tissue. In looking through a
microscope how could you distinguish skeletal muscle tissue from smooth muscle?
4.5 Nervous Tissue Mediates Perception and Response
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the classes of cells that make up nervous tissue
•
Discuss how nervous tissue mediates perception and response
Nervous tissue is characterized as being excitable and capable of sending and receiving electrochemical signals that
provide the body with information. Two main classes of cells make up nervous tissue: the neuron and neuroglia
(Figure 4.19). Neurons propagate information via electrochemical impulses, called action potentials, which are
biochemically linked to the release of chemical signals. Neuroglia play an essential role in supporting neurons and
modulating their information propagation.
4.5 • Nervous Tissue Mediates Perception and Response
149
FIGURE 4.19
The Neuron
The cell body of a neuron, also called the soma, contains the nucleus and mitochondria. The dendrites
transfer the nerve impulse to the soma. The axon carries the action potential away to another excitable cell. LM × 1600. (Micrograph
provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Follow this link (http://openstax.org/l/nobel) to learn more about nervous tissue. What are the main parts of a nerve
cell?
Neurons display distinctive morphology, well suited to their role as conducting cells, with three main parts. The cell
body includes most of the cytoplasm, the organelles, and the nucleus. Dendrites branch off the cell body and appear
as thin extensions. A long “tail,” the axon, extends from the neuron body and can be wrapped in an insulating layer
known as myelin, which is formed by accessory cells. The synapse is the gap between nerve cells, or between a
nerve cell and its target, for example, a muscle or a gland, across which the impulse is transmitted by chemical
compounds known as neurotransmitters. Neurons categorized as multipolar neurons have several dendrites and a
single prominent axon. Bipolar neurons possess a single dendrite and axon with the cell body, while unipolar
neurons have only a single process extending out from the cell body, which divides into a functional dendrite and
into a functional axon. When a neuron is sufficiently stimulated, it generates an action potential that propagates
down the axon towards the synapse. If enough neurotransmitters are released at the synapse to stimulate the next
neuron or target, a response is generated.
The second class of neural cells comprises the neuroglia or glial cells, which have been characterized as having a
simple support role. The word “glia” comes from the Greek word for glue. Recent research is shedding light on the
more complex role of neuroglia in the function of the brain and nervous system. Astrocyte cells, named for their
distinctive star shape, are abundant in the central nervous system. The astrocytes have many functions, including
regulation of ion concentration in the intercellular space, uptake and/or breakdown of some neurotransmitters, and
formation of the blood-brain barrier, the membrane that separates the circulatory system from the brain. Microglia
protect the nervous system against infection but are not nervous tissue because they are related to macrophages.
Oligodendrocyte cells produce myelin in the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) while the Schwann cell
produces myelin in the peripheral nervous system (Figure 4.20).
150
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 4.20
Nervous Tissue
Nervous tissue is made up of neurons and neuroglia. The cells of nervous tissue are specialized to
transmit and receive impulses. LM × 872. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
4.6 Tissue Injury and Aging
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the cardinal signs of inflammation
•
List the body’s response to tissue injury
•
Explain the process of tissue repair
•
Discuss the progressive impact of aging on tissue
•
Describe cancerous mutations’ effect on tissue
Tissues of all types are vulnerable to injury and, inevitably, aging. In the former case, understanding how tissues
respond to damage can guide strategies to aid repair. In the latter case, understanding the impact of aging can help
in the search for ways to diminish its effects.
Tissue Injury and Repair
Inflammation is the standard, initial response of the body to injury. Whether biological, chemical, physical, or
radiation burns, all injuries lead to the same sequence of physiological events. Inflammation limits the extent of
injury, partially or fully eliminates the cause of injury, and initiates repair and regeneration of damaged tissue.
Necrosis, or accidental cell death, causes inflammation. Apoptosis is programmed cell death, a normal step-by-
step process that destroys cells no longer needed by the body. By mechanisms still under investigation, apoptosis
does not initiate the inflammatory response. Acute inflammation resolves over time by the healing of tissue. If
inflammation persists, it becomes chronic and leads to diseased conditions. Arthritis and tuberculosis are examples
of chronic inflammation. The suffix “-itis” denotes inflammation of a specific organ or type, for example, peritonitis
is the inflammation of the peritoneum, and meningitis refers to the inflammation of the meninges, the tough
membranes that surround the central nervous system
The four cardinal signs of inflammation—redness, swelling, pain, and local heat—were first recorded in antiquity.
Cornelius Celsus is credited with documenting these signs during the days of the Roman Empire, as early as the first
century AD. A fifth sign, loss of function, may also accompany inflammation.
Upon tissue injury, damaged cells release inflammatory chemical signals that evoke local vasodilation, the widening
of the blood vessels. Increased blood flow results in apparent redness and heat. In response to injury, mast cells
present in tissue degranulate, releasing the potent vasodilator histamine. Increased blood flow and inflammatory
mediators recruit white blood cells to the site of inflammation. The endothelium lining the local blood vessel
becomes “leaky” under the influence of histamine and other inflammatory mediators allowing neutrophils,
macrophages, and fluid to move from the blood into the interstitial tissue spaces. The excess liquid in tissue causes
swelling, more properly called edema. The swollen tissues squeezing pain receptors cause the sensation of pain.
Prostaglandins released from injured cells also activate pain neurons. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) reduce pain because they inhibit the synthesis of prostaglandins. High levels of NSAIDs reduce
inflammation. Antihistamines decrease allergies by blocking histamine receptors and as a result the histamine
4.6 • Tissue Injury and Aging
151
response.
After containment of an injury, the tissue repair phase starts with removal of toxins and waste products. Clotting
(coagulation) reduces blood loss from damaged blood vessels and forms a network of fibrin proteins that trap blood
cells and bind the edges of the wound together. A scab forms when the clot dries, reducing the risk of infection.
Sometimes a mixture of dead leukocytes and fluid called pus accumulates in the wound. As healing progresses,
fibroblasts from the surrounding connective tissues replace the collagen and extracellular material lost by the injury.
Angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels, results in vascularization of the new tissue known as granulation
tissue. The clot retracts pulling the edges of the wound together, and it slowly dissolves as the tissue is repaired.
When a large amount of granulation tissue forms and capillaries disappear, a pale scar is often visible in the healed
area. A primary union describes the healing of a wound where the edges are close together. When there is a gaping
wound, it takes longer to refill the area with cells and collagen. The process called secondary union occurs as the
edges of the wound are pulled together by what is called wound contraction. When a wound is more than one
quarter of an inch deep, sutures (stitches) are recommended to promote a primary union and avoid the formation of
a disfiguring scar. Regeneration is the addition of new cells of the same type as the ones that were injured (Figure
4.21).
FIGURE 4.21
Tissue Healing
During wound repair, collagen fibers are laid down randomly by fibroblasts that move into repair the area.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/healingskin) to see the skin healing process. What is the process and how 
long does it take?
Tissue and Aging
According to poet Ralph Waldo Emerson, “The surest poison is time.” In fact, biology confirms that many functions
of the body decline with age. All the cells, tissues, and organs are affected by senescence, with noticeable variability
between individuals owing to different genetic makeup and lifestyles. The outward signs of aging are easily
recognizable. The skin and other tissues become thinner and drier, reducing their elasticity, contributing to wrinkles
and high blood pressure. Hair turns gray because follicles produce less melanin, the brown pigment of hair and the
iris of the eye. The face looks flabby because elastic and collagen fibers decrease in connective tissue and muscle
tone is lost. Glasses and hearing aids may become parts of life as the senses slowly deteriorate, all due to reduced
elasticity. Overall height decreases as the bones lose calcium and other minerals. With age, fluid decreases in the
fibrous cartilage disks intercalated between the vertebrae in the spine. Joints lose cartilage and stiffen. Many
tissues, including those in muscles, lose mass through a process called atrophy. Lumps and rigidity become more
widespread. As a consequence, the passageways, blood vessels, and airways become more rigid. The brain and
spinal cord lose mass. Nerves do not transmit impulses with the same speed and frequency as in the past. Some
loss of thought clarity and memory can accompany aging. More severe problems are not necessarily associated with
the aging process and may be symptoms of underlying illness.
152
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
As exterior signs of aging increase, so do the interior signs, which are not as noticeable. The incidence of heart
diseases, respiratory syndromes, and type 2 diabetes increases with age, though these are not necessarily age-
dependent effects. Wound healing is slower in the elderly, accompanied by a higher frequency of infection as the
capacity of the immune system to fend off pathogen declines.
Aging is also apparent at the cellular level because all cells experience changes with aging. Telomeres, regions of
the chromosomes necessary for cell division, shorten each time cells divide. As they do, cells are less able to divide
and regenerate. Because of alterations in cell membranes, transport of oxygen and nutrients into the cell and
removal of carbon dioxide and waste products from the cell are not as efficient in the elderly. Cells may begin to
function abnormally, which may lead to diseases associated with aging, including arthritis, memory issues, and
some cancers.
The progressive impact of aging on the body varies considerably among individuals, but Studies indicate, however,
that exercise and healthy lifestyle choices can slow down the deterioration of the body that comes with old age.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Tissues and Cancer
Cancer is a generic term for many diseases in which cells escape regulatory signals. Uncontrolled growth, invasion
into adjacent tissues, and colonization of other organs, if not treated early enough, are its hallmarks. Health suffers
when tumors “rob” blood supply from the “normal” organs.
A mutation is defined as a permanent change in the DNA of a cell. Epigenetic modifications, changes that do not
affect the code of the DNA but alter how the DNA is decoded, are also known to generate abnormal cells. Alterations
in the genetic material may be caused by environmental agents, infectious agents, or errors in the replication of DNA
that accumulate with age. Many mutations do not cause any noticeable change in the functions of a cell. However, if
the modification affects key proteins that have an impact on the cell’s ability to proliferate in an orderly fashion, the
cell starts to divide abnormally. As changes in cells accumulate, they lose their ability to form regular tissues. A
tumor, a mass of cells displaying abnormal architecture, forms in the tissue. Many tumors are benign, meaning they
do not metastasize nor cause disease. A tumor becomes malignant, or cancerous, when it breaches the confines of
its tissue, promotes angiogenesis, attracts the growth of capillaries, and metastasizes to other organs (Figure 4.22).
The specific names of cancers reflect the tissue of origin. Cancers derived from epithelial cells are referred to as
carcinomas. Cancer in myeloid tissue or blood cells form myelomas. Leukemias are cancers of white blood cells,
whereas sarcomas derive from connective tissue. Cells in tumors differ both in structure and function. Some cells,
called cancer stem cells, appear to be a subtype of cell responsible for uncontrolled growth. Recent research shows
that contrary to what was previously assumed, tumors are not disorganized masses of cells, but have their own
structures.
4.6 • Tissue Injury and Aging
153
FIGURE 4.22
Development of Cancer
Note the change in cell size, nucleus size, and organization in the tissue.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/tumor) to learn more about tumors. What is a tumor?
Cancer treatments vary depending on the disease’s type and stage. Traditional approaches, including surgery,
radiation, chemotherapy, and hormonal therapy, aim to remove or kill rapidly dividing cancer cells, but these
strategies have their limitations. Depending on a tumor’s location, for example, cancer surgeons may be unable to
remove it. Radiation and chemotherapy are difficult, and it is often impossible to target only the cancer cells. The
treatments inevitably destroy healthy tissue as well. To address this, researchers are working on pharmaceuticals
that can target specific proteins implicated in cancer-associated molecular pathways.
154
4 • The Tissue Level of Organization
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
adipocytes
lipid storage cells
adipose tissue
specialized areolar tissue rich in
stored fat
anchoring junction
mechanically attaches adjacent
cells to each other or to the basement membrane
apical
that part of a cell or tissue which, in general,
faces an open space
apocrine secretion
release of a substance along with
the apical portion of the cell
apoptosis
programmed cell death
areolar tissue
(also, loose connective tissue) a type
of connective tissue proper that shows little
specialization with cells dispersed in the matrix
astrocyte
star-shaped cell in the central nervous
system that regulates ions and uptake and/or
breakdown of some neurotransmitters and
contributes to the formation of the blood-brain
barrier
atrophy
loss of mass and function
basal lamina
thin extracellular layer that lies
underneath epithelial cells and separates them from
other tissues
basement membrane
in epithelial tissue, a thin layer
of fibrous material that anchors the epithelial tissue
to the underlying connective tissue; made up of the
basal lamina and reticular lamina
cardiac muscle
heart muscle, under involuntary
control, composed of striated cells that attach to
form fibers, each cell contains a single nucleus,
contracts autonomously
cell junction
point of cell-to-cell contact that
connects one cell to another in a tissue
chondrocytes
cells of the cartilage
clotting
also called coagulation; complex process by
which blood components form a plug to stop
bleeding
collagen fiber
flexible fibrous proteins that give
connective tissue tensile strength
connective tissue
type of tissue that serves to hold in
place, connect, and integrate the body’s organs and
systems
connective tissue membrane
connective tissue that
encapsulates organs and lines movable joints
connective tissue proper
connective tissue
containing a viscous matrix, fibers, and cells.
cutaneous membrane
skin; epithelial tissue made up
of a stratified squamous epithelial cells that cover
the outside of the body
dense connective tissue
connective tissue proper
that contains many fibers that provide both
elasticity and protection
ectoderm
outermost embryonic germ layer from
which the epidermis and the nervous tissue derive
elastic cartilage
type of cartilage, with elastin as the
major protein, characterized by rigid support as well
as elasticity
elastic fiber
fibrous protein within connective tissue
that contains a high percentage of the protein
elastin that allows the fibers to stretch and return to
original size
endocrine gland
groups of cells that release
chemical signals into the intercellular fluid to be
picked up and transported to their target organs by
blood
endoderm
innermost embryonic germ layer from
which most of the digestive system and lower
respiratory system derive
endothelium
tissue that lines vessels of the
lymphatic and cardiovascular system, made up of a
simple squamous epithelium
epithelial membrane
epithelium attached to a layer
of connective tissue
epithelial tissue
type of tissue that serves primarily
as a covering or lining of body parts, protecting the
body; it also functions in absorption, transport, and
secretion
exocrine gland
group of epithelial cells that secrete
substances through ducts that open to the skin or to
internal body surfaces that lead to the exterior of
the body
fibroblast
most abundant cell type in connective
tissue, secretes protein fibers and matrix into the
extracellular space
fibrocartilage
tough form of cartilage, made of thick
bundles of collagen fibers embedded in chondroitin
sulfate ground substance
fibrocyte
less active form of fibroblast
fluid connective tissue
specialized cells that
circulate in a watery fluid containing salts, nutrients,
and dissolved proteins
gap junction
allows cytoplasmic communications to
occur between cells
goblet cell
unicellular gland found in columnar
epithelium that secretes mucous
ground substance
fluid or semi-fluid portion of the
matrix
histamine
chemical compound released by mast
cells in response to injury that causes vasodilation
and endothelium permeability
histology
microscopic study of tissue architecture,
organization, and function
holocrine secretion
release of a substance caused by
the rupture of a gland cell, which becomes part of
the secretion
4 • Key Terms
155
hyaline cartilage
most common type of cartilage,
smooth and made of short collagen fibers
embedded in a chondroitin sulfate ground
substance
inflammation
response of tissue to injury
lacunae
(singular = lacuna) small spaces in bone or
cartilage tissue that cells occupy
lamina propria
areolar connective tissue underlying a
mucous membrane
loose connective tissue
(also, areolar tissue) type of
connective tissue proper that shows little
specialization with cells dispersed in the matrix
matrix
extracellular material which is produced by
the cells embedded in it, containing ground
substance and fibers
merocrine secretion
release of a substance from a
gland via exocytosis
mesenchymal cell
adult stem cell from which most
connective tissue cells are derived
mesenchyme
embryonic tissue from which
connective tissue cells derive
mesoderm
middle embryonic germ layer from which
connective tissue, muscle tissue, and some
epithelial tissue derive
mesothelium
simple squamous epithelial tissue
which covers the major body cavities and is the
epithelial portion of serous membranes
mucous connective tissue
specialized loose
connective tissue present in the umbilical cord
mucous gland
group of cells that secrete mucous, a
thick, slippery substance that keeps tissues moist
and acts as a lubricant
mucous membrane
tissue membrane that is covered
by protective mucous and lines tissue exposed to
the outside environment
muscle tissue
type of tissue that is capable of
contracting and generating tension in response to
stimulation; produces movement.
myelin
layer of lipid inside some neuroglial cells that
wraps around the axons of some neurons
myocyte
muscle cells
necrosis
accidental death of cells and tissues
nervous tissue
type of tissue that is capable of
sending and receiving impulses through
electrochemical signals.
neuroglia
supportive neural cells
neuron
excitable neural cell that transfer nerve
impulses
oligodendrocyte
neuroglial cell that produces myelin
in the brain
parenchyma
functional cells of a gland or organ, in
contrast with the supportive or connective tissue of
a gland or organ
primary union
condition of a wound where the
wound edges are close enough to be brought
together and fastened if necessary, allowing quicker
and more thorough healing
pseudostratified columnar epithelium
tissue that
consists of a single layer of irregularly shaped and
sized cells that give the appearance of multiple
layers; found in ducts of certain glands and the
upper respiratory tract
reticular fiber
fine fibrous protein, made of collagen
subunits, which cross-link to form supporting “nets”
within connective tissue
reticular lamina
matrix containing collagen and
elastin secreted by connective tissue; a component
of the basement membrane
reticular tissue
type of loose connective tissue that
provides a supportive framework to soft organs,
such as lymphatic tissue, spleen, and the liver
Schwann cell
neuroglial cell that produces myelin in
the peripheral nervous system
secondary union
wound healing facilitated by wound
contraction
serous gland
group of cells within the serous
membrane that secrete a lubricating substance onto
the surface
serous membrane
type of tissue membrane that
lines body cavities and lubricates them with serous
fluid
simple columnar epithelium
tissue that consists of a
single layer of column-like cells; promotes secretion
and absorption in tissues and organs
simple cuboidal epithelium
tissue that consists of a
single layer of cube-shaped cells; promotes
secretion and absorption in ducts and tubules
simple squamous epithelium
tissue that consists of
a single layer of flat scale-like cells; promotes
diffusion and filtration across surface
skeletal muscle
usually attached to bone, under
voluntary control, each cell is a fiber that is
multinucleated and striated
smooth muscle
under involuntary control, moves
internal organs, cells contain a single nucleus, are
spindle-shaped, and do not appear striated; each
cell is a fiber
stratified columnar epithelium
tissue that consists
of two or more layers of column-like cells, contains
glands and is found in some ducts
stratified cuboidal epithelium
tissue that consists of
two or more layers of cube-shaped cells, found in
some ducts
stratified squamous epithelium
tissue that consists
of multiple layers of cells with the most apical being
flat scale-like cells; protects surfaces from abrasion
156
4 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
striation
alignment of parallel actin and myosin
filaments which form a banded pattern
supportive connective tissue
type of connective
tissue that provides strength to the body and
protects soft tissue
synovial membrane
connective tissue membrane
that lines the cavities of freely movable joints,
producing synovial fluid for lubrication
tight junction
forms an impermeable barrier between
cells
tissue
group of cells that are similar in form and
perform related functions
tissue membrane
thin layer or sheet of cells that
covers the outside of the body, organs, and internal
cavities
totipotent
embryonic cells that have the ability to
differentiate into any type of cell and organ in the
body
transitional epithelium
form of stratified epithelium
found in the urinary tract, characterized by an apical
layer of cells that change shape in response to the
presence of urine
vasodilation
widening of blood vessels
wound contraction
process whereby the borders of a
wound are physically drawn together
Chapter Review
4.1 Types of Tissues
The human body contains more than 200 types of cells
that can all be classified into four types of tissues:
epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. Epithelial
tissues act as coverings controlling the movement of
materials across the surface. Connective tissue
integrates the various parts of the body and provides
support and protection to organs. Muscle tissue allows
the body to move. Nervous tissues propagate
information.
The study of the shape and arrangement of cells in
tissue is called histology. All cells and tissues in the
body derive from three germ layers in the embryo: the
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.
Different types of tissues form membranes that
enclose organs, provide a friction-free interaction
between organs, and keep organs together. Synovial
membranes are connective tissue membranes that
protect and line the joints. Epithelial membranes are
formed from epithelial tissue attached to a layer of
connective tissue. There are three types of epithelial
membranes: mucous, which contain glands; serous,
which secrete fluid; and cutaneous which makes up the
skin.
4.2 Epithelial Tissue
In epithelial tissue, cells are closely packed with little
or no extracellular matrix except for the basal lamina
that separates the epithelium from underlying tissue.
The main functions of epithelia are protection from the
environment, coverage, secretion and excretion,
absorption, and filtration. Cells are bound together by
tight junctions that form an impermeable barrier. They
can also be connected by gap junctions, which allow
free exchange of soluble molecules between cells, and
anchoring junctions, which attach cell to cell or cell to
matrix. The different types of epithelial tissues are
characterized by their cellular shapes and
arrangements: squamous, cuboidal, or columnar
epithelia. Single cell layers form simple epithelia,
whereas stacked cells form stratified epithelia. Very
few capillaries penetrate these tissues.
Glands are secretory tissues and organs that are
derived from epithelial tissues. Exocrine glands release
their products through ducts. Endocrine glands secrete
hormones directly into the interstitial fluid and blood
stream. Glands are classified both according to the
type of secretion and by their structure. Merocrine
glands secrete products as they are synthesized.
Apocrine glands release secretions by pinching off the
apical portion of the cell, whereas holocrine gland cells
store their secretions until they rupture and release
their contents. In this case, the cell becomes part of
the secretion.
4.3 Connective Tissue Supports and
Protects
Connective tissue is a heterogeneous tissue with many
cell shapes and tissue architecture. Structurally, all
connective tissues contain cells that are embedded in
an extracellular matrix stabilized by proteins. The
chemical nature and physical layout of the extracellular
matrix and proteins vary enormously among tissues,
reflecting the variety of functions that connective
tissue fulfills in the body. Connective tissues separate
and cushion organs, protecting them from shifting or
traumatic injury. Connect tissues provide support and
assist movement, store and transport energy
molecules, protect against infections, and contribute to
temperature homeostasis.
Many different cells contribute to the formation of
connective tissues. They originate in the mesodermal
germ layer and differentiate from mesenchyme and
hematopoietic tissue in the bone marrow. Fibroblasts
4 • Chapter Review
157
are the most abundant and secrete many protein
fibers, adipocytes specialize in fat storage,
hematopoietic cells from the bone marrow give rise to
all the blood cells, chondrocytes form cartilage, and
osteocytes form bone. The extracellular matrix
contains fluid, proteins, polysaccharide derivatives,
and, in the case of bone, mineral crystals. Protein fibers
fall into three major groups: collagen fibers that are
thick, strong, flexible, and resist stretch; reticular fibers
that are thin and form a supportive mesh; and elastin
fibers that are thin and elastic.
The major types of connective tissue are connective
tissue proper, supportive tissue, and fluid tissue. Loose
connective tissue proper includes adipose tissue,
areolar tissue, and reticular tissue. These serve to hold
organs and other tissues in place and, in the case of
adipose tissue, isolate and store energy reserves. The
matrix is the most abundant feature for loose tissue
although adipose tissue does not have much
extracellular matrix. Dense connective tissue proper is
richer in fibers and may be regular, with fibers oriented
in parallel as in ligaments and tendons, or irregular,
with fibers oriented in several directions. Organ
capsules (collagenous type) and walls of arteries
(elastic type) contain dense irregular connective tissue.
Cartilage and bone are supportive tissue. Cartilage
contains chondrocytes and is somewhat flexible.
Hyaline cartilage is smooth and clear, covers joints, and
is found in the growing portion of bones. Fibrocartilage
is tough because of extra collagen fibers and forms,
among other things, the intervertebral discs. Elastic
cartilage can stretch and recoil to its original shape
because of its high content of elastic fibers. The matrix
contains very few blood vessels. Bones are made of a
rigid, mineralized matrix containing calcium salts,
crystals, and osteocytes lodged in lacunae. Bone tissue
is highly vascularized. Cancellous bone is spongy and
less solid than compact bone. Fluid tissue, for example
blood and lymph, is characterized by a liquid matrix
and no supporting fibers.
4.4 Muscle Tissue and Motion
The three types of muscle cells are skeletal, cardiac,
and smooth. Their morphologies match their specific
functions in the body. Skeletal muscle is voluntary and
responds to conscious stimuli. The cells are striated
and multinucleated appearing as long, unbranched
cylinders. Cardiac muscle is involuntary and found only
in the heart. Each cell is striated with a single nucleus
and they attach to one another to form long fibers.
Cells are attached to one another at intercalated disks.
The cells are interconnected physically and
electrochemically to act as a syncytium. Cardiac
muscle cells contract autonomously and involuntarily.
Smooth muscle is involuntary. Each cell is a spindle-
shaped fiber and contains a single nucleus. No
striations are evident because the actin and myosin
filaments do not align in the cytoplasm.
4.5 Nervous Tissue Mediates Perception
and Response
The most prominent cell of the nervous tissue, the
neuron, is characterized mainly by its ability to receive
stimuli and respond by generating an electrical signal,
known as an action potential, which can travel rapidly
over great distances in the body. A typical neuron
displays a distinctive morphology: a large cell body
branches out into short extensions called dendrites,
which receive chemical signals from other neurons,
and a long tail called an axon, which relays signals
away from the cell to other neurons, muscles, or
glands. Many axons are wrapped by a myelin sheath, a
lipid derivative that acts as an insulator and speeds up
the transmission of the action potential. Other cells in
the nervous tissue, the neuroglia, include the
astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and Schwann
cells.
4.6 Tissue Injury and Aging
Inflammation is the classic response of the body to
injury and follows a common sequence of events. The
area is red, feels warm to the touch, swells, and is
painful. Injured cells, mast cells, and resident
macrophages release chemical signals that cause
vasodilation and fluid leakage in the surrounding
tissue. The repair phase includes blood clotting,
followed by regeneration of tissue as fibroblasts
deposit collagen. Some tissues regenerate more
readily than others. Epithelial and connective tissues
replace damaged or dead cells from a supply of adult
stem cells. Muscle and nervous tissues undergo either
slow regeneration or do not repair at all.
Age affects all the tissues and organs of the body.
Damaged cells do not regenerate as rapidly as in
younger people. Perception of sensation and
effectiveness of response are lost in the nervous
system. Muscles atrophy, and bones lose mass and
become brittle. Collagen decreases in some connective
tissue, and joints stiffen.
158
4 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
Interactive Link Questions
1. View this slideshow (http://openstax.org/l/
stemcells) to learn more about stem cells. How do
somatic stem cells differ from embryonic stem
cells?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/etissues) to
find out more about the anatomy of epithelial
tissues. Where in the body would one find non-
keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/musctissue)
to learn more about muscle tissue. In looking
through a microscope how could you distinguish
skeletal muscle tissue from smooth muscle?
4. Follow this link (http://openstax.org/l/nobel) to 
learn more about nervous tissue. What are the main 
parts of a nerve cell?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/healingskin) 
to see the skin healing process. What is the process 
and how long does it take?
6. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/tumor) to 
learn more about tumors. What is a tumor?
Review Questions
7. Which of the following is not a type of tissue?
a.
muscle
b.
nervous
c.
embryonic
d.
epithelial
8. The process by which a less specialized cell
matures into a more specialized cell is called
________.
a.
differentiation
b.
maturation
c.
modification
d.
specialization
9. Differentiated cells in a developing embryo derive
from ________.
a.
endothelium, mesothelium, and epithelium
b.
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm
c.
connective tissue, epithelial tissue, and muscle
tissue
d.
epidermis, mesoderm, and endothelium
10. Which of the following lines the body cavities
exposed to the external environment?
a.
mesothelium
b.
lamina propria
c.
mesenteries
d.
mucosa
11. In observing epithelial cells under a microscope,
the cells are arranged in a single layer and look tall
and narrow, and the nucleus is located close to
the basal side of the cell. The specimen is what
type of epithelial tissue?
a.
columnar
b.
stratified
c.
squamous
d.
transitional
12. Which of the following is the epithelial tissue that
lines the interior of blood vessels?
a.
columnar
b.
pseudostratified
c.
simple squamous
d.
transitional
13. Which type of epithelial tissue specializes in
moving particles across its surface?
a.
transitional
b.
stratified columnar
c.
pseudostratified ciliated columnar
d.
stratified squamous
14. The ________ exocrine gland stores its secretion
until the glandular cell ruptures, whereas the
________ gland releases its apical region and
reforms.
a.
holocrine; apocrine
b.
eccrine; endocrine
c.
apocrine; holocrine
d.
eccrine; apocrine
15. Connective tissue is made of which three essential
components?
a.
cells, ground substance, and carbohydrate
fibers
b.
cells, ground substance, and protein fibers
c.
collagen, ground substance, and protein
fibers
d.
matrix, ground substance, and fluid
16. Under the microscope, a tissue specimen shows
cells located in spaces scattered in a transparent
background. This is probably ________.
a.
loose connective tissue
b.
a tendon
c.
bone
d.
hyaline cartilage
4 • Interactive Link Questions
159
17. Which connective tissue specializes in storage of
fat?
a.
tendon
b.
adipose tissue
c.
reticular tissue
d.
dense connective tissue
18. Ligaments connect bones together and withstand
a lot of stress. What type of connective tissue
should you expect ligaments to contain?
a.
areolar tissue
b.
adipose tissue
c.
dense regular connective tissue
d.
dense irregular connective tissue
19. In adults, new connective tissue cells originate
from the ________.
a.
mesoderm
b.
mesenchyme
c.
ectoderm
d.
endoderm
20. In bone, the main cells are ________.
a.
fibroblasts
b.
chondrocytes
c.
lymphocytes
d.
osteocytes
21. Striations, cylindrical cells, and multiple nuclei are
observed in ________.
a.
skeletal muscle only
b.
cardiac muscle only
c.
smooth muscle only
d.
skeletal and cardiac muscles
22. The cells of muscles, myocytes, develop from
________.
a.
myoblasts
b.
endoderm
c.
fibrocytes
d.
chondrocytes
23. Skeletal muscle is composed of very hard working
cells. Which organelles do you expect to find in
abundance in skeletal muscle cell?
a.
nuclei
b.
striations
c.
golgi bodies
d.
mitochondria
24. The cells responsible for the transmission of the
nerve impulse are ________.
a.
neurons
b.
oligodendrocytes
c.
astrocytes
d.
microglia
25. The nerve impulse travels down a(n) ________,
away from the cell body.
a.
dendrite
b.
axon
c.
microglia
d.
collagen fiber
26. Which of the following central nervous system
cells regulate ions, regulate the uptake and/or
breakdown of some neurotransmitters, and
contribute to the formation of the blood-brain
barrier?
a.
microglia
b.
neuroglia
c.
oligodendrocytes
d.
astrocytes
27. Which of the following processes is not a cardinal
sign of inflammation?
a.
redness
b.
heat
c.
fever
d.
swelling
28. When a mast cell reacts to an irritation, which of
the following chemicals does it release?
a.
collagen
b.
histamine
c.
hyaluronic acid
d.
meylin
29. Atrophy refers to ________.
a.
loss of elasticity
b.
loss of mass
c.
loss of rigidity
d.
loss of permeability
30. Individuals can slow the rate of aging by modifying
all of these lifestyle aspects except for ________.
a.
diet
b.
exercise
c.
genetic factors
d.
stress
Critical Thinking Questions
31. Identify the four types of tissue in the body, and
describe the major functions of each tissue.
160
4 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
32. The zygote is described as totipotent because it
ultimately gives rise to all the cells in your body
including the highly specialized cells of your
nervous system. Describe this transition,
discussing the steps and processes that lead to
these specialized cells.
33. What is the function of synovial membranes?
34. The structure of a tissue usually is optimized for
its function. Describe how the structure of the
mucosa and its cells match its function of nutrient
absorption.
35. One of the main functions of connective tissue is
to integrate organs and organ systems in the body.
Discuss how blood fulfills this role.
36. Why does an injury to cartilage, especially hyaline
cartilage, heal much more slowly than a bone
fracture?
37. You are watching cells in a dish spontaneously
contract. They are all contracting at different
rates; some fast, some slow. After a while, several
cells link up and they begin contracting in
synchrony. Discuss what is going on and what type
of cells you are looking at.
38. Why does skeletal muscle look striated?
39. Which morphological adaptations of neurons
make them suitable for the transmission of nerve
impulse?
40. What are the functions of astrocytes?
41. Why is it important to watch for increased
redness, swelling and pain after a cut or abrasion
has been cleaned and bandaged?
42. Aspirin is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) that inhibits the formation of blood clots
and is taken regularly by individuals with a heart
condition. Steroids such as cortisol are used to
control some autoimmune diseases and severe
arthritis by down-regulating the inflammatory
response. After reading the role of inflammation in
the body’s response to infection, can you predict
an undesirable consequence of taking anti-
inflammatory drugs on a regular basis?
43. As an individual ages, a constellation of symptoms
begins the decline to the point where an
individual’s functioning is compromised. Identify
and discuss two factors that have a role in factors
leading to the compromised situation.
44. Discuss changes that occur in cells as a person
ages.
4 • Critical Thinking Questions
161
162
4 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 5
The Integumentary System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying the chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the integumentary system and the role it plays in homeostasis
•
Describe the layers of the skin and the functions of each layer
•
Describe the accessory structures of the skin and the functions of each
•
Describe the changes that occur in the integumentary system during the aging process
•
Discuss several common diseases, disorders, and injuries that affect the integumentary system
•
Explain treatments for some common diseases, disorders, and injuries of the integumentary system
What do you think when you look at your skin in the mirror? Do you think about covering it with
makeup, adding a tattoo, or maybe a body piercing? Or do you think about the fact that the skin belongs to one of
the body’s most essential and dynamic systems: the integumentary system? The integumentary system refers to the
skin and its accessory structures, and it is responsible for much more than simply lending to your outward
appearance. In the adult human body, the skin makes up about 16 percent of body weight and covers an area of 1.5
to 2 m2. In fact, the skin and accessory structures are the largest organ system in the human body. As such, the skin
protects your inner organs and it is in need of daily care and protection to maintain its health. This chapter will
introduce the structure and functions of the integumentary system, as well as some of the diseases, disorders, and
injuries that can affect this system.
5.1 Layers of the Skin
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the components of the integumentary system
•
Describe the layers of the skin and the functions of each layer
•
Identify and describe the hypodermis and deep fascia
•
Describe the role of keratinocytes and their life cycle
•
Describe the role of melanocytes in skin pigmentation
Although you may not typically think of the skin as an organ, it is in fact made of tissues that work together as a
single structure to perform unique and critical functions. The skin and its accessory structures make up the
integumentary system, which provides the body with overall protection. The skin is made of multiple layers of cells
and tissues, which are held to underlying structures by connective tissue (Figure 5.2). The deeper layer of skin is
well vascularized (has numerous blood vessels). It also has numerous sensory, and autonomic and sympathetic
Figure 5.1
Your skin is a vital part of your life and appearance (a–b). Some people choose to embellish it with tattoos (a) or makeup (b).
(credit a: Steve Teo; credit b: “spaceodissey”/flickr)
nerve fibers ensuring communication to and from the brain.
FIGURE 5.2
Layers of Skin
The skin is composed of two main layers: the epidermis, made of closely packed epithelial cells, and the
dermis, made of dense, irregular connective tissue that houses blood vessels, hair follicles, sweat glands, and other structures. Beneath the
dermis lies the hypodermis, which is composed mainly of loose connective and fatty tissues.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The skin consists of two main layers and a closely associated layer. View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
layers) to learn more about layers of the skin. What are the basic functions of each of these layers?
The Epidermis
The epidermis is composed of keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. It is made of four or five layers of
epithelial cells, depending on its location in the body. It does not have any blood vessels within it (i.e., it is
avascular). Skin that has four layers of cells is referred to as “thin skin.” From deep to superficial, these layers are
the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, and stratum corneum. Most of the skin can be
classified as thin skin. “Thick skin” is found only on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet. It has a fifth
layer, called the stratum lucidum, located between the stratum corneum and the stratum granulosum (Figure 5.3).
FIGURE 5.3
Thin Skin versus Thick Skin
These slides show cross-sections of the epidermis and dermis of (a) thin and (b) thick skin.
Note the significant difference in the thickness of the epithelial layer of the thick skin. From top, LM × 40, LM × 40. (Micrographs provided by
the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The cells in all of the layers except the stratum basale are called keratinocytes. A keratinocyte is a cell that
manufactures and stores the protein keratin. Keratin is an intracellular fibrous protein that gives hair, nails, and skin
their hardness and water-resistant properties. The keratinocytes in the stratum corneum are dead and regularly
slough away, being replaced by cells from the deeper layers (Figure 5.4).
164
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 5.4
Epidermis
The epidermis is epithelium composed of multiple layers of cells. The basal layer consists of cuboidal cells,
whereas the outer layers are squamous, keratinized cells, so the whole epithelium is often described as being keratinized stratified
squamous epithelium. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/Epidermis) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin, what do you notice about the cells?
Stratum Basale
The stratum basale (also called the stratum germinativum) is the deepest epidermal layer and attaches the
epidermis to the basal lamina, below which lie the layers of the dermis. The cells in the stratum basale bond to the
dermis via intertwining collagen fibers, referred to as the basement membrane. A finger-like projection, or fold,
known as the dermal papilla (plural = dermal papillae) is found in the superficial portion of the dermis. Dermal
papillae increase the strength of the connection between the epidermis and dermis; the greater the folding, the
stronger the connections made (Figure 5.5).
FIGURE 5.5
Layers of the Epidermis
The epidermis of thick skin has five layers: stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum
granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum.
The stratum basale is a single layer of cells primarily made of basal cells. A basal cell is a cuboidal-shaped stem cell
5.1 • Layers of the Skin
165
that is a precursor of the keratinocytes of the epidermis. All of the keratinocytes are produced from this single layer
of cells, which are constantly going through mitosis to produce new cells. As new cells are formed, the existing cells
are pushed superficially away from the stratum basale. Two other cell types are found dispersed among the basal
cells in the stratum basale. The first is a Merkel cell, which functions as a receptor and is responsible for stimulating
sensory nerves that the brain perceives as touch. These cells are especially abundant on the surfaces of the hands
and feet. The second is a melanocyte, a cell that produces the pigment melanin. Melanin gives hair and skin its
color, and also helps protect the living cells of the epidermis from ultraviolet (UV) radiation damage.
In a growing fetus, fingerprints form where the cells of the stratum basale meet the papillae of the underlying
dermal layer (papillary layer), resulting in the formation of the ridges on your fingers that you recognize as
fingerprints. Fingerprints are unique to each individual and are used for forensic analyses because the patterns do
not change with the growth and aging processes.
Stratum Spinosum
As the name suggests, the stratum spinosum is spiny in appearance due to the protruding cell processes that join
the cells via a structure called a desmosome. The desmosomes interlock with each other and strengthen the bond
between the cells. It is interesting to note that the “spiny” nature of this layer is an artifact of the staining process.
Unstained epidermis samples do not exhibit this characteristic appearance. The stratum spinosum is composed of
eight to 10 layers of keratinocytes, formed as a result of cell division in the stratum basale (Figure 5.6). Interspersed
among the keratinocytes of this layer is a type of dendritic cell called the Langerhans cell, which functions as a
macrophage by engulfing bacteria, foreign particles, and damaged cells that occur in this layer.
FIGURE 5.6
Cells of the Epidermis
The cells in the different layers of the epidermis originate from basal cells located in the stratum
basale, yet the cells of each layer are distinctively different. EM × 2700. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/basal) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin, what do you notice about the cells?
The keratinocytes in the stratum spinosum begin the synthesis of keratin and release a water-repelling glycolipid
166
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
that helps prevent water loss from the body, making the skin relatively waterproof. As new keratinocytes are
produced atop the stratum basale, the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum are pushed into the stratum
granulosum.
Stratum Granulosum
The stratum granulosum has a grainy appearance due to further changes to the keratinocytes as they are pushed
from the stratum spinosum. The cells (three to five layers deep) become flatter, their cell membranes thicken, and
they generate large amounts of the proteins keratin, which is fibrous, and keratohyalin, which accumulates as
lamellar granules within the cells (see Figure 5.5). These two proteins make up the bulk of the keratinocyte mass in
the stratum granulosum and give the layer its grainy appearance. The nuclei and other cell organelles disintegrate as
the cells die, leaving behind the keratin, keratohyalin, and cell membranes that will form the stratum lucidum, the
stratum corneum, and the accessory structures of hair and nails.
Stratum Lucidum
The stratum lucidum is a smooth, seemingly translucent layer of the epidermis located just above the stratum
granulosum and below the stratum corneum. This thin layer of cells is found only in the thick skin of the palms,
soles, and digits. The keratinocytes that compose the stratum lucidum are dead and flattened (see Figure 5.5).
These cells are densely packed with eleidin, a clear protein, derived from keratohyalin, which gives these cells their
transparent (i.e., lucid) appearance.
Stratum Corneum
The stratum corneum is the most superficial layer of the epidermis and is the layer exposed to the outside
environment (see Figure 5.5). The increased keratinization (also called cornification) of the cells in this layer gives it
its name. There are usually 15 to 30 layers of cells in the stratum corneum. This dry, dead layer helps prevent the
penetration of microbes and the dehydration of underlying tissues, and provides a mechanical protection against
abrasion for the more delicate, underlying layers. Cells in this layer are shed periodically and are replaced by cells
pushed up from the stratum granulosum (or stratum lucidum in the case of the palms and soles of feet). The entire
layer is replaced during a period of about 4 weeks. Cosmetic procedures, such as microdermabrasion, help remove
some of the dry, upper layer and aim to keep the skin looking “fresh” and healthy.
Dermis
The dermis might be considered the “core” of the integumentary system (derma- = “skin”), as distinct from the
epidermis (epi- = “upon” or “over”) and hypodermis (hypo- = “below”). It contains blood and lymph vessels, nerves,
and other structures, such as hair follicles and sweat glands. The dermis is made of two layers of connective tissue
that compose an interconnected mesh of elastin and collagenous fibers, produced by fibroblasts (Figure 5.7).
5.1 • Layers of the Skin
167
FIGURE 5.7
Layers of the Dermis
This stained slide shows the two components of the dermis—the papillary layer and the reticular
layer. Both are made of connective tissue with fibers of collagen extending from one to the other, making the border between the two
somewhat indistinct. The dermal papillae extending into the epidermis belong to the papillary layer, whereas the dense collagen fiber
bundles below belong to the reticular layer. LM × 10. (credit: modification of work by “kilbad”/Wikimedia Commons)
Papillary Layer
The papillary layer is made of loose, areolar connective tissue, which means the collagen and elastin fibers of this
layer form a loose mesh. This superficial layer of the dermis projects into the stratum basale of the epidermis to
form finger-like dermal papillae (see Figure 5.7). Within the papillary layer are fibroblasts, a small number of fat
cells (adipocytes), and an abundance of small blood vessels. In addition, the papillary layer contains phagocytes,
defensive cells that help fight bacteria or other infections that have breached the skin. This layer also contains
lymphatic capillaries, nerve fibers, and touch receptors called the Meissner corpuscles.
Reticular Layer
Underlying the papillary layer is the much thicker reticular layer, composed of dense, irregular connective tissue.
This layer is well vascularized and has a rich sensory and sympathetic nerve supply. The reticular layer appears
reticulated (net-like) due to a tight meshwork of fibers. Elastin fibers provide some elasticity to the skin, enabling
movement. Collagen fibers provide structure and tensile strength, with strands of collagen extending into both the
papillary layer and the hypodermis. In addition, collagen binds water to keep the skin hydrated. Collagen injections
and Retin-A creams help restore skin turgor by either introducing collagen externally or stimulating blood flow and
repair of the dermis, respectively.
Hypodermis
The hypodermis (also called the subcutaneous layer or superficial fascia) is a layer directly below the dermis and
serves to connect the skin to the underlying fascia (fibrous tissue) of the bones and muscles. It is not strictly a part
of the skin, although the border between the hypodermis and dermis can be difficult to distinguish. The hypodermis
consists of well-vascularized, loose, areolar connective tissue and adipose tissue, which functions as a mode of fat
storage and provides insulation and cushioning for the integument.
168
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Pigmentation
The color of skin is influenced by a number of pigments, including melanin, carotene, and hemoglobin. Recall that
melanin is produced by cells called melanocytes, which are found scattered throughout the stratum basale of the
epidermis. The melanin is transferred into the keratinocytes via a cellular vesicle called a melanosome (Figure 5.8).
Everyday Connection
Lipid Storage
The hypodermis is home to most of the fat that concerns people when they are trying to keep their weight under
control. Adipose tissue present in the hypodermis consists of fat-storing cells called adipocytes. This stored fat
can serve as an energy reserve, insulate the body to prevent heat loss, and act as a cushion to protect underlying
structures from trauma.
Where the fat is deposited and accumulates within the hypodermis depends on hormones (testosterone,
estrogen, insulin, glucagon, leptin, and others), as well as genetic factors. Fat distribution changes as our bodies
mature and age. Males tend to accumulate fat in different areas (neck, arms, lower back, and abdomen) than do
females (breasts, hips, thighs, and buttocks). The body mass index (BMI) is often used as a measure of fat,
although this measure is, in fact, derived from a mathematical formula that compares body weight (mass) to
height. Therefore, its accuracy as a health indicator can be called into question in individuals who are extremely
physically fit.
In many animals, there is a pattern of storing excess calories as fat to be used in times when food is not readily
available. In much of the developed world, insufficient exercise coupled with the ready availability and
consumption of high-calorie foods have resulted in unwanted accumulations of adipose tissue in many people.
Although periodic accumulation of excess fat may have provided an evolutionary advantage to our ancestors,
who experienced unpredictable bouts of famine, it is now becoming chronic and considered a major health
threat. Recent studies indicate that a distressing percentage of our population is overweight and/or clinically
obese. Not only is this a problem for the individuals affected, but it also has a severe impact on our healthcare
system. Changes in lifestyle, specifically in diet and exercise, are the best ways to control body fat accumulation,
especially when it reaches levels that increase the risk of heart disease and diabetes.
5.1 • Layers of the Skin
169
FIGURE 5.8
Skin Pigmentation
The relative coloration of the skin depends of the amount of melanin produced by melanocytes in the
stratum basale and taken up by keratinocytes.
Melanin occurs in two primary forms. Eumelanin exists as black and brown, whereas pheomelanin provides a red
color. Dark-skinned individuals produce more melanin than those with pale skin. Exposure to the UV rays of the sun
or a tanning salon causes melanin to be manufactured and built up in keratinocytes, as sun exposure stimulates
keratinocytes to secrete chemicals that stimulate melanocytes. The accumulation of melanin in keratinocytes
results in the darkening of the skin, or a tan. This increased melanin accumulation protects the DNA of epidermal
cells from UV ray damage and the breakdown of folic acid, a nutrient necessary for our health and well-being. In
contrast, too much melanin can interfere with the production of vitamin D, an important nutrient involved in calcium
absorption. Thus, the amount of melanin present in our skin is dependent on a balance between available sunlight
and folic acid destruction, and protection from UV radiation and vitamin D production.
It requires about 10 days after initial sun exposure for melanin synthesis to peak, which is why pale-skinned
individuals tend to suffer sunburns of the epidermis initially. Dark-skinned individuals can also get sunburns, but are
more protected than are pale-skinned individuals. Melanosomes are temporary structures that are eventually
destroyed by fusion with lysosomes; this fact, along with melanin-filled keratinocytes in the stratum corneum
sloughing off, makes tanning impermanent.
Too much sun exposure can eventually lead to wrinkling due to the destruction of the cellular structure of the skin,
and in severe cases, can cause sufficient DNA damage to result in skin cancer. When there is an irregular
accumulation of melanocytes in the skin, freckles appear. Moles are larger masses of melanocytes, and although
most are benign, they should be monitored for changes that might indicate the presence of cancer (Figure 5.9).
170
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 5.9
Moles
Moles range from benign accumulations of melanocytes to melanomas. These structures populate the landscape of
our skin. (credit: the National Cancer Institute)
Disorders of the...
Integumentary System
The first thing a clinician sees is the skin, and so the examination of the skin should be part of any thorough
physical examination. Most skin disorders are relatively benign, but a few, including melanomas, can be fatal if
untreated. A couple of the more noticeable disorders, albinism and vitiligo, affect the appearance of the skin and
its accessory organs. Although neither is fatal, it would be hard to claim that they are benign, at least to the
individuals so afflicted.
Albinism is a genetic disorder that affects (completely or partially) the coloring of skin, hair, and eyes. The
defect is primarily due to the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin. Individuals with albinism tend to
appear white or very pale due to the lack of melanin in their skin and hair. Recall that melanin helps protect the
skin from the harmful effects of UV radiation. Individuals with albinism tend to need more protection from UV
radiation, as they are more prone to sunburns and skin cancer. They also tend to be more sensitive to light and
have vision problems due to the lack of pigmentation on the retinal wall. Treatment of this disorder usually
involves addressing the symptoms, such as limiting UV light exposure to the skin and eyes. In vitiligo, the
melanocytes in certain areas lose their ability to produce melanin, possibly due to an autoimmune reaction. This
leads to a loss of color in patches (Figure 5.10). Neither albinism nor vitiligo directly affects the lifespan of an
individual.
5.1 • Layers of the Skin
171
INTERACTIVE LINK
This ABC video follows the story of a pair of fraternal African-American twins, one of whom is albino. Watch this
video (http://openstax.org/l/albino) to learn about the challenges these children and their family face. Which
ethnicities do you think are exempt from the possibility of albinism?
5.2 Accessory Structures of the Skin
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the accessory structures of the skin
•
Describe the structure and function of hair and nails
•
Describe the structure and function of sweat glands and sebaceous glands
Accessory structures of the skin include hair, nails, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands. These structures
embryologically originate from the epidermis and can extend down through the dermis into the hypodermis.
Hair
Hair is a keratinous filament growing out of the epidermis. It is primarily made of dead, keratinized cells. Strands of
hair originate in an epidermal penetration of the dermis called the hair follicle. The hair shaft is the part of the hair
not anchored to the follicle, and much of this is exposed at the skin’s surface. The rest of the hair, which is anchored
in the follicle, lies below the surface of the skin and is referred to as the hair root. The hair root ends deep in the
dermis at the hair bulb, and includes a layer of mitotically active basal cells called the hair matrix. The hair bulb
surrounds the hair papilla, which is made of connective tissue and contains blood capillaries and nerve endings
from the dermis (Figure 5.11).
FIGURE 5.10
Vitiligo
Individuals with vitiligo experience depigmentation that results in lighter colored patches of skin. The
condition is especially noticeable on darker skin. (credit: (a) Klaus D. Peter (b) Owl Bridge Media / Wikimedia.)
Other changes in the appearance of skin coloration can be indicative of diseases associated with other body
systems. Liver disease or liver cancer can cause the accumulation of bile and the yellow pigment bilirubin,
leading to the skin appearing yellow or jaundiced (jaune is the French word for “yellow”). Tumors of the pituitary
gland can result in the secretion of large amounts of melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), which results in a
darkening of the skin. Similarly, Addison’s disease can stimulate the release of excess amounts of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which can give the skin a deep bronze color. A sudden drop in oxygenation
can affect skin color, causing the skin to initially turn ashen (white). With a prolonged reduction in oxygen levels,
dark red deoxyhemoglobin becomes dominant in the blood, making the skin appear blue, a condition referred to
as cyanosis (kyanos is the Greek word for “blue”). This happens when the oxygen supply is restricted, as when
someone is experiencing difficulty in breathing because of asthma or a heart attack. However, in these cases the
effect on skin color has nothing do with the skin’s pigmentation.
172
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 5.11
Hair
Hair follicles originate in the epidermis and have many different parts.
Just as the basal layer of the epidermis forms the layers of epidermis that get pushed to the surface as the dead
skin on the surface sheds, the basal cells of the hair bulb divide and push cells outward in the hair root and shaft as
the hair grows. The medulla forms the central core of the hair, which is surrounded by the cortex, a layer of
compressed, keratinized cells that is covered by an outer layer of very hard, keratinized cells known as the cuticle.
These layers are depicted in a longitudinal cross-section of the hair follicle (Figure 5.12), although not all hair has a
medullary layer. Hair texture (straight, curly) is determined by the shape and structure of the cortex, and to the
extent that it is present, the medulla. The shape and structure of these layers are, in turn, determined by the shape
of the hair follicle. Hair growth begins with the production of keratinocytes by the basal cells of the hair bulb. As new
cells are deposited at the hair bulb, the hair shaft is pushed through the follicle toward the surface. Keratinization is
completed as the cells are pushed to the skin surface to form the shaft of hair that is externally visible. The external
hair is completely dead and composed entirely of keratin. For this reason, our hair does not have sensation.
Furthermore, you can cut your hair or shave without damaging the hair structure because the cut is superficial. Most
chemical hair removers also act superficially; however, electrolysis and yanking both attempt to destroy the hair
bulb so hair cannot grow.
5.2 • Accessory Structures of the Skin
173
FIGURE 5.12
Hair Follicle
The slide shows a cross-section of a hair follicle. Basal cells of the hair matrix in the center differentiate into
cells of the inner root sheath. Basal cells at the base of the hair root form the outer root sheath. LM × 4. (credit: modification of work by
“kilbad”/Wikimedia Commons)
The wall of the hair follicle is made of three concentric layers of cells. The cells of the internal root sheath surround
the root of the growing hair and extend just up to the hair shaft. They are derived from the basal cells of the hair
matrix. The external root sheath, which is an extension of the epidermis, encloses the hair root. It is made of basal
cells at the base of the hair root and tends to be more keratinous in the upper regions. The glassy membrane is a
thick, clear connective tissue sheath covering the hair root, connecting it to the tissue of the dermis.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The hair follicle is made of multiple layers of cells that form from basal cells in the hair matrix and the hair root. Cells
of the hair matrix divide and differentiate to form the layers of the hair. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
follicle) to learn more about hair follicles.
Hair serves a variety of functions, including protection, sensory input, thermoregulation, and communication. For
example, hair on the head protects the skull from the sun. The hair in the nose and ears, and around the eyes
(eyelashes) defends the body by trapping and excluding dust particles that may contain allergens and microbes.
Hair of the eyebrows prevents sweat and other particles from dripping into and bothering the eyes. Hair also has a
sensory function due to sensory innervation by a hair root plexus surrounding the base of each hair follicle. Hair is
extremely sensitive to air movement or other disturbances in the environment, much more so than the skin surface.
This feature is also useful for the detection of the presence of insects or other potentially damaging substances on
the skin surface. Each hair root is connected to a smooth muscle called the arrector pili that contracts in response
to nerve signals from the sympathetic nervous system, making the external hair shaft “stand up.” The primary
purpose for this is to trap a layer of air to add insulation. This is visible in humans as goose bumps and even more
obvious in animals, such as when a frightened cat raises its fur. Of course, this is much more obvious in organisms
with a heavier coat than most humans, such as dogs and cats.
Hair Growth
Hair grows and is eventually shed and replaced by new hair. This occurs in three phases. The first is the anagen
phase, during which cells divide rapidly at the root of the hair, pushing the hair shaft up and out. The length of this
phase is measured in years, typically from 2 to 7 years. The catagen phase lasts only 2 to 3 weeks, and marks a
transition from the hair follicle’s active growth. Finally, during the telogen phase, the hair follicle is at rest and no
new growth occurs. At the end of this phase, which lasts about 2 to 4 months, another anagen phase begins. The
basal cells in the hair matrix then produce a new hair follicle, which pushes the old hair out as the growth cycle
repeats itself. Hair typically grows at the rate of 0.3 mm per day during the anagen phase. On average, 50 hairs are
lost and replaced per day. Hair loss occurs if there is more hair shed than what is replaced and can happen due to
hormonal or dietary changes. Hair loss can also result from the aging process, or the influence of hormones.
174
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Hair Color
Similar to the skin, hair gets its color from the pigment melanin, produced by melanocytes in the hair papilla.
Different hair color results from differences in the type of melanin, which is genetically determined. As a person
ages, the melanin production decreases, and hair tends to lose its color and becomes gray and/or white.
Nails
The nail bed is a specialized structure of the epidermis that is found at the tips of our fingers and toes. The nail body
is formed on the nail bed, and protects the tips of our fingers and toes as they are the farthest extremities and the
parts of the body that experience the maximum mechanical stress (Figure 5.13). In addition, the nail body forms a
back-support for picking up small objects with the fingers. The nail body is composed of densely packed dead
keratinocytes. The epidermis in this part of the body has evolved a specialized structure upon which nails can form.
The nail body forms at the nail root, which has a matrix of proliferating cells from the stratum basale that enables
the nail to grow continuously. The lateral nail fold overlaps the nail on the sides, helping to anchor the nail body. The
nail fold that meets the proximal end of the nail body forms the nail cuticle, also called the eponychium. The nail
bed is rich in blood vessels, making it appear pink, except at the base, where a thick layer of epithelium over the nail
matrix forms a crescent-shaped region called the lunula (the “little moon”). The area beneath the free edge of the
nail, furthest from the cuticle, is called the hyponychium. It consists of a thickened layer of stratum corneum.
FIGURE 5.13
Nails
The nail is an accessory structure of the integumentary system.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Nails are accessory structures of the integumentary system. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/nails) to learn more
about the origin and growth of fingernails.
Sweat Glands
When the body becomes warm, sudoriferous glands produce sweat to cool the body. Sweat glands develop from
epidermal projections into the dermis and are classified as merocrine glands; that is, the secretions are excreted by
5.2 • Accessory Structures of the Skin
175
exocytosis through a duct without affecting the cells of the gland. There are two types of sweat glands, each
secreting slightly different products.
An eccrine sweat gland is type of gland that produces a hypotonic sweat for thermoregulation. These glands are
found all over the skin’s surface, but are especially abundant on the palms of the hand, the soles of the feet, and the
forehead (Figure 5.14). They are coiled glands lying deep in the dermis, with the duct rising up to a pore on the skin
surface, where the sweat is released. This type of sweat, released by exocytosis, is hypotonic and composed mostly
of water, with some salt, antibodies, traces of metabolic waste, and dermicidin, an antimicrobial peptide. Eccrine
glands are a primary component of thermoregulation in humans and thus help to maintain homeostasis.
FIGURE 5.14
Eccrine Gland
Eccrine glands are coiled glands in the dermis that release sweat that is mostly water.
An apocrine sweat gland is usually associated with hair follicles in densely hairy areas, such as armpits and genital
regions. Apocrine sweat glands are larger than eccrine sweat glands and lie deeper in the dermis, sometimes even
reaching the hypodermis, with the duct normally emptying into the hair follicle. In addition to water and salts,
apocrine sweat includes organic compounds that make the sweat thicker and subject to bacterial decomposition
and subsequent smell. The release of this sweat is under both nervous and hormonal control, and plays a role in the
poorly understood human pheromone response. Most commercial antiperspirants use an aluminum-based
compound as their primary active ingredient to stop sweat. When the antiperspirant enters the sweat gland duct,
the aluminum-based compounds precipitate due to a change in pH and form a physical block in the duct, which
prevents sweat from coming out of the pore.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Sweating regulates body temperature. The composition of the sweat determines whether body odor is a byproduct
of sweating. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/sweating) to learn more about sweating and body odor.
Sebaceous Glands
A sebaceous gland is a type of oil gland that is found all over the body and helps to lubricate and waterproof the
skin and hair. Most sebaceous glands are associated with hair follicles. They generate and excrete sebum, a mixture
of lipids, onto the skin surface, thereby naturally lubricating the dry and dead layer of keratinized cells of the stratum
corneum, keeping it pliable. The fatty acids of sebum also have antibacterial properties, and prevent water loss from
the skin in low-humidity environments. The secretion of sebum is stimulated by hormones, many of which do not
become active until puberty. Thus, sebaceous glands are relatively inactive during childhood.
176
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 Functions of the Integumentary System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the different functions of the skin and the structures that enable them
•
Explain how the skin helps maintain body temperature
The skin and accessory structures perform a variety of essential functions, such as protecting the body from
invasion by microorganisms, chemicals, and other environmental factors; preventing dehydration; acting as a
sensory organ; modulating body temperature and electrolyte balance; and synthesizing vitamin D. The underlying
hypodermis has important roles in storing fats, forming a “cushion” over underlying structures, and providing
insulation from cold temperatures.
Protection
The skin protects the rest of the body from the basic elements of nature such as wind, water, and UV sunlight. It acts
as a protective barrier against water loss, due to the presence of layers of keratin and glycolipids in the stratum
corneum. It also is the first line of defense against abrasive activity due to contact with grit, microbes, or harmful
chemicals. Sweat excreted from sweat glands deters microbes from over-colonizing the skin surface by generating
dermicidin, which has antibiotic properties.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Tattooing has a long history, dating back thousands of years ago. The dyes used in tattooing typically derive from
metals. A person with tattoos should be cautious when having a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan because an
MRI machine uses powerful magnets to create images of the soft tissues of the body, which could react with the
metals contained in the tattoo dyes. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/tattoo) to learn more about tattooing.
Sensory Function
The fact that you can feel an ant crawling on your skin, allowing you to flick it off before it bites, is because the skin,
and especially the hairs projecting from hair follicles in the skin, can sense changes in the environment. The hair root
plexus surrounding the base of the hair follicle senses a disturbance, and then transmits the information to the
central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), which can then respond by activating the skeletal muscles of your
eyes to see the ant and the skeletal muscles of the body to act against the ant.
The skin acts as a sense organ because the epidermis, dermis, and the hypodermis contain specialized sensory
nerve structures that detect touch, surface temperature, and pain. These receptors are more concentrated on the
tips of the fingers, which are most sensitive to touch, especially the Meissner corpuscle (tactile corpuscle) (Figure
5.15), which responds to light touch, and the Pacinian corpuscle (lamellated corpuscle), which responds to
Everyday Connection
Tattoos and Piercings
The word “armor” evokes several images. You might think of a Roman centurion or a medieval knight in a suit of
armor. The skin, in its own way, functions as a form of armor—body armor. It provides a barrier between your
vital, life-sustaining organs and the influence of outside elements that could potentially damage them.
For any form of armor, a breach in the protective barrier poses a danger. The skin can be breached when a child
skins a knee or an adult has blood drawn—one is accidental and the other medically necessary. However, you
also breach this barrier when you choose to “accessorize” your skin with a tattoo or body piercing. Because the
needles involved in producing body art and piercings must penetrate the skin, there are dangers associated with
the practice. These include allergic reactions; skin infections; blood-borne diseases, such as tetanus, hepatitis
C, and hepatitis D; and the growth of scar tissue. Despite the risk, the practice of piercing the skin for decorative
purposes has become increasingly popular. According to the American Academy of Dermatology, 24 percent of
people from ages 18 to 50 have a tattoo.
5.3 • Functions of the Integumentary System
177
vibration. Merkel cells, seen scattered in the stratum basale, are also touch receptors. In addition to these
specialized receptors, there are sensory nerves connected to each hair follicle, pain and temperature receptors
scattered throughout the skin, and motor nerves innervate the arrector pili muscles and glands. This rich innervation
helps us sense our environment and react accordingly.
FIGURE 5.15
Light Micrograph of a Meissner Corpuscle
In this micrograph of a skin cross-section, you can see a Meissner corpuscle
(arrow), a type of touch receptor located in a dermal papilla adjacent to the basement membrane and stratum basale of the overlying
epidermis. LM × 100. (credit: “Wbensmith”/Wikimedia Commons)
Thermoregulation
The integumentary system helps regulate body temperature through its tight association with the sympathetic
nervous system, the division of the nervous system involved in our fight-or-flight responses. The sympathetic
nervous system is continuously monitoring body temperature and initiating appropriate motor responses. Recall
that sweat glands, accessory structures to the skin, secrete water, salt, and other substances to cool the body when
it becomes warm. Even when the body does not appear to be noticeably sweating, approximately 500 mL of sweat
(insensible perspiration) are secreted a day. If the body becomes excessively warm due to high temperatures,
vigorous activity (Figure 5.16ac), or a combination of the two, sweat glands will be stimulated by the sympathetic
nervous system to produce large amounts of sweat, as much as 0.7 to 1.5 L per hour for an active person. When the
sweat evaporates from the skin surface, the body is cooled as body heat is dissipated.
In addition to sweating, arterioles in the dermis dilate so that excess heat carried by the blood can dissipate through
the skin and into the surrounding environment (Figure 5.16b). This accounts for the skin redness that many people
experience when exercising.
178
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 5.16
Thermoregulation
During strenuous physical activities, such as skiing (a) or running (c), the dermal blood vessels dilate
and sweat secretion increases (b). These mechanisms prevent the body from overheating. In contrast, the dermal blood vessels constrict to
minimize heat loss in response to low temperatures (b). (credit a: “Trysil”/flickr; credit c: Ralph Daily)
When body temperatures drop, the arterioles constrict to minimize heat loss, particularly in the ends of the digits
and tip of the nose. This reduced circulation can result in the skin taking on a whitish hue. Although the temperature
of the skin drops as a result, passive heat loss is prevented, and internal organs and structures remain warm. If the
temperature of the skin drops too much (such as environmental temperatures below freezing), the conservation of
body core heat can result in the skin actually freezing, a condition called frostbite.
Aging and the...
Integumentary System
All systems in the body accumulate subtle and some not-so-subtle changes as a person ages. Among these
changes are reductions in cell division, metabolic activity, blood circulation, hormonal levels, and muscle
strength (Figure 5.17). In the skin, these changes are reflected in decreased mitosis in the stratum basale,
leading to a thinner epidermis. The dermis, which is responsible for the elasticity and resilience of the skin,
exhibits a reduced ability to regenerate, which leads to slower wound healing. The hypodermis, with its fat
stores, loses structure due to the reduction and redistribution of fat, which in turn contributes to the thinning
and sagging of skin.
FIGURE 5.17
Aging
Generally, skin, especially on the face and hands, starts to display the first noticeable signs of aging, as it loses
its elasticity over time. (credit: Janet Ramsden)
5.3 • Functions of the Integumentary System
179
Vitamin D Synthesis
The epidermal layer of human skin synthesizes vitamin D when exposed to UV radiation. In the presence of
sunlight, a form of vitamin D3 called cholecalciferol is synthesized from a derivative of the steroid cholesterol in the
skin. The liver converts cholecalciferol to calcidiol, which is then converted to calcitriol (the active chemical form of
the vitamin) in the kidneys. Vitamin D is essential for normal absorption of calcium and phosphorous, which are
required for healthy bones. The absence of sun exposure can lead to a lack of vitamin D in the body, leading to a
condition called rickets, a painful condition in children where the bones are misshapen due to a lack of calcium,
causing bowleggedness. Elderly individuals who suffer from vitamin D deficiency can develop a condition called
osteomalacia, a softening of the bones. In present day society, vitamin D is added as a supplement to many foods,
including milk and orange juice, compensating for the need for sun exposure.
In addition to its essential role in bone health, vitamin D is essential for general immunity against bacterial, viral,
and fungal infections. Recent studies are also finding a link between insufficient vitamin D and cancer.
5.4 Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe several different diseases and disorders of the skin
•
Describe the effect of injury to the skin and the process of healing
The integumentary system is susceptible to a variety of diseases, disorders, and injuries. These range from annoying
but relatively benign bacterial or fungal infections that are categorized as disorders, to skin cancer and severe burns,
which can be fatal. In this section, you will learn several of the most common skin conditions.
Diseases
One of the most talked about diseases is skin cancer. Cancer is a broad term that describes diseases caused by
abnormal cells in the body dividing uncontrollably. Most cancers are identified by the organ or tissue in which the
cancer originates. One common form of cancer is skin cancer. The Skin Cancer Foundation reports that one in five
Americans will experience some type of skin cancer in their lifetime. The degradation of the ozone layer in the
atmosphere and the resulting increase in exposure to UV radiation has contributed to its rise. Overexposure to UV
radiation damages DNA, which can lead to the formation of cancerous lesions. Although melanin offers some
protection against DNA damage from the sun, often it is not enough. The fact that cancers can also occur on areas of
the body that are normally not exposed to UV radiation suggests that there are additional factors that can lead to
cancerous lesions.
In general, cancers result from an accumulation of DNA mutations. These mutations can result in cell populations
that do not die when they should and uncontrolled cell proliferation that leads to tumors. Although many tumors are
benign (harmless), some produce cells that can mobilize and establish tumors in other organs of the body; this
process is referred to as metastasis. Cancers are characterized by their ability to metastasize.
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma is a form of cancer that affects the mitotically active stem cells in the stratum basale of the
The accessory structures also have lowered activity, generating thinner hair and nails, and reduced amounts of
sebum and sweat. A reduced sweating ability can cause some elderly to be intolerant to extreme heat. Other
cells in the skin, such as melanocytes and dendritic cells, also become less active, leading to a paler skin tone
and lowered immunity. Wrinkling of the skin occurs due to breakdown of its structure, which results from
decreased collagen and elastin production in the dermis, weakening of muscles lying under the skin, and the
inability of the skin to retain adequate moisture.
Many anti-aging products can be found in stores today. In general, these products try to rehydrate the skin and
thereby fill out the wrinkles, and some stimulate skin growth using hormones and growth factors. Additionally,
invasive techniques include collagen injections to plump the tissue and injections of BOTOX® (the name brand of
the botulinum neurotoxin) that paralyze the muscles that crease the skin and cause wrinkling.
180
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
epidermis. It is the most common of all cancers that occur in the United States and is frequently found on the head,
neck, arms, and back, which are areas that are most susceptible to long-term sun exposure. Although UV rays are
the main culprit, exposure to other agents, such as radiation and arsenic, can also lead to this type of cancer.
Wounds on the skin due to open sores, tattoos, burns, etc. may be predisposing factors as well. Basal cell
carcinomas start in the stratum basale and usually spread along this boundary. At some point, they begin to grow
toward the surface and become an uneven patch, bump, growth, or scar on the skin surface (Figure 5.18). Like most
cancers, basal cell carcinomas respond best to treatment when caught early. Treatment options include surgery,
freezing (cryosurgery), and topical ointments (Mayo Clinic 2012).
FIGURE 5.18
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma can take several different forms. Similar to other forms of skin cancer, it is
readily cured if caught early and treated. (credit: John Hendrix, MD)
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma is a cancer that affects the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and presents as
lesions commonly found on the scalp, ears, and hands (Figure 5.19). It is the second most common skin cancer. The
American Cancer Society reports that two of 10 skin cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, and it is more
aggressive than basal cell carcinoma. If not removed, these carcinomas can metastasize. Surgery and radiation are
used to cure squamous cell carcinoma.
FIGURE 5.19
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma presents here as a lesion on an individual’s nose. (credit: the
National Cancer Institute)
Melanoma
A melanoma is a cancer characterized by the uncontrolled growth of melanocytes, the pigment-producing cells in
the epidermis. Typically, a melanoma develops from a mole. It is the most fatal of all skin cancers, as it is highly
metastatic and can be difficult to detect before it has spread to other organs. Melanomas usually appear as
asymmetrical brown and black patches with uneven borders and a raised surface (Figure 5.20). Treatment typically
involves surgical excision and immunotherapy.
FIGURE 5.20
Melanoma
Melanomas typically present as large brown or black patches with uneven borders and a raised surface.
5.4 • Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
181
(credit: the National Cancer Institute / Centers for Disease Control)
Doctors often give their patients the following ABCDE mnemonic to help with the diagnosis of early-stage
melanoma. If you observe a mole on your body displaying these signs, consult a doctor.
•
Asymmetry – the two sides are not symmetrical
•
Borders – the edges are irregular in shape
•
Color – the color is varied shades of brown or black
•
Diameter – it is larger than 6 mm (0.24 in)
•
Evolving – its shape has changed
Some specialists cite the following additional signs for the most serious form, nodular melanoma:
•
Elevated – it is raised on the skin surface
•
Firm – it feels hard to the touch
•
Growing – it is getting larger
Skin Disorders
Two common skin disorders are eczema and acne. Eczema is an inflammatory condition and occurs in individuals of
all ages. Acne involves the clogging of pores, which can lead to infection and inflammation, and is often seen in
adolescents. Other disorders, not discussed here, include seborrheic dermatitis (on the scalp), psoriasis, cold sores,
impetigo, scabies, hives, and warts.
Eczema
Eczema is an allergic reaction that manifests as dry, itchy patches of skin that resemble rashes (Figure 5.21). It may
be accompanied by swelling of the skin, flaking, and in severe cases, bleeding. Many who suffer from eczema have
antibodies against dust mites in their blood, but the link between eczema and allergy to dust mites has not been
proven. Symptoms are usually managed with moisturizers, corticosteroid creams, and immunosuppressants.
FIGURE 5.21
Eczema
Eczema is a common skin disorder that presents as a red, flaky rash. (credit: “Jambula” Wikimedia Commons /
NIAID, Flickr)
Acne
Acne is a skin disturbance that typically occurs on areas of the skin that are rich in sebaceous glands (face and
back). It is most common along with the onset of puberty due to associated hormonal changes, but can also occur in
infants and continue into adulthood. Hormones, such as androgens, stimulate the release of sebum. An
overproduction and accumulation of sebum along with keratin can block hair follicles. This plug is initially white. The
sebum, when oxidized by exposure to air, turns black. Acne results from infection by acne-causing bacteria
(Propionibacterium and Staphylococcus), which can lead to redness and potential scarring due to the natural wound
healing process (Figure 5.22).
182
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 5.22
Acne
Acne is a result of over-productive sebaceous glands, which leads to formation of blackheads and inflammation of
the skin.
CAREER CONNECTION
Dermatologist
Have you ever had a rash that did not respond to over-the-counter creams, or a mole that you were concerned
about? Dermatologists help patients with these types of problems and more, on a daily basis. Dermatologists are
medical doctors who specialize in diagnosing and treating skin disorders. Like all medical doctors, dermatologists
earn a medical degree and then complete several years of residency training. In addition, dermatologists may then
participate in a dermatology fellowship or complete additional, specialized training in a dermatology practice. If
practicing in the United States, dermatologists must pass the United States Medical Licensing Exam (USMLE),
become licensed in their state of practice, and be certified by the American Board of Dermatology.
Most dermatologists work in a medical office or private-practice setting. They diagnose skin conditions and rashes,
prescribe oral and topical medications to treat skin conditions, and may perform simple procedures, such as mole or
wart removal. In addition, they may refer patients to an oncologist if skin cancer that has metastasized is suspected.
Recently, cosmetic procedures have also become a prominent part of dermatology. Botox injections, laser
treatments, and collagen and dermal filler injections are popular among patients, hoping to reduce the appearance
of skin aging.
Dermatology is a competitive specialty in medicine. Limited openings in dermatology residency programs mean that
many medical students compete for a few select spots. Dermatology is an appealing specialty to many prospective
doctors, because unlike emergency room physicians or surgeons, dermatologists generally do not have to work
excessive hours or be “on-call” weekends and holidays. Moreover, the popularity of cosmetic dermatology has made
it a growing field with many lucrative opportunities. It is not unusual for dermatology clinics to market themselves
exclusively as cosmetic dermatology centers, and for dermatologists to specialize exclusively in these procedures.
Consider visiting a dermatologist to talk about why they entered the field and what the field of dermatology is like.
Visit this site (http://www.Diplomaguide.com) for additional information.
Injuries
Because the skin is the part of our bodies that meets the world most directly, it is especially vulnerable to injury.
Injuries include burns and wounds, as well as scars and calluses. They can be caused by sharp objects, heat, or
excessive pressure or friction to the skin.
Skin injuries set off a healing process that occurs in several overlapping stages. The first step to repairing damaged
skin is the formation of a blood clot that helps stop the flow of blood and scabs over with time. Many different types
of cells are involved in wound repair, especially if the surface area that needs repair is extensive. Before the basal
5.4 • Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
183
stem cells of the stratum basale can recreate the epidermis, fibroblasts mobilize and divide rapidly to repair the
damaged tissue by collagen deposition, forming granulation tissue. Blood capillaries follow the fibroblasts and help
increase blood circulation and oxygen supply to the area. Immune cells, such as macrophages, roam the area and
engulf any foreign matter to reduce the chance of infection.
Burns
A burn results when the skin is damaged by intense heat, radiation, electricity, or chemicals. The damage results in
the death of skin cells, which can lead to a massive loss of fluid. Dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and renal and
circulatory failure follow, which can be fatal. Burn patients are treated with intravenous fluids to offset dehydration,
as well as intravenous nutrients that enable the body to repair tissues and replace lost proteins. Another serious
threat to the lives of burn patients is infection. Burned skin is extremely susceptible to bacteria and other
pathogens, due to the loss of protection by intact layers of skin.
Burns are sometimes measured in terms of the size of the total surface area affected. This is referred to as the “rule
of nines,” which associates specific anatomical areas with a percentage that is a factor of nine (Figure 5.23). Burns
are also classified by the degree of their severity. A first-degree burn is a superficial burn that affects only the
epidermis. Although the skin may be painful and swollen, these burns typically heal on their own within a few days.
Mild sunburn fits into the category of a first-degree burn. A second-degree burn goes deeper and affects both the
epidermis and a portion of the dermis. These burns result in swelling and a painful blistering of the skin. It is
important to keep the burn site clean and sterile to prevent infection. If this is done, the burn will heal within several
weeks. A third-degree burn fully extends into the epidermis and dermis, destroying the tissue and affecting the
nerve endings and sensory function. These are serious burns that may appear white, red, or black; they require
medical attention and will heal slowly without it. A fourth-degree burn is even more severe, affecting the underlying
muscle and bone. Oddly, third and fourth-degree burns are usually not as painful because the nerve endings
themselves are damaged. Full-thickness burns cannot be repaired by the body, because the local tissues used for
repair are damaged and require excision (debridement), or amputation in severe cases, followed by grafting of the
skin from an unaffected part of the body, or from skin grown in tissue culture for grafting purposes.
FIGURE 5.23
Calculating the Size of a Burn
The size of a burn will guide decisions made about the need for specialized treatment.
Specific parts of the body are associated with a percentage of body area.
184
5 • The Integumentary System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Skin grafts are required when the damage from trauma or infection cannot be closed with sutures or staples. Watch
this video (http://openstax.org/l/skingraft) to learn more about skin grafting procedures.
Scars and Keloids
Most cuts or wounds, with the exception of ones that only scratch the surface (the epidermis), lead to scar
formation. A scar is collagen-rich skin formed after the process of wound healing that differs from normal skin.
Scarring occurs in cases in which there is repair of skin damage, but the skin fails to regenerate the original skin
structure. Fibroblasts generate scar tissue in the form of collagen, and the bulk of repair is due to the basket-weave
pattern generated by collagen fibers and does not result in regeneration of the typical cellular structure of skin.
Instead, the tissue is fibrous in nature and does not allow for the regeneration of accessory structures, such as hair
follicles, sweat glands, or sebaceous glands.
Sometimes, there is an overproduction of scar tissue, because the process of collagen formation does not stop when
the wound is healed; this results in the formation of a raised or hypertrophic scar called a keloid. In contrast, scars
that result from acne and chickenpox have a sunken appearance and are called atrophic scars.
Scarring of skin after wound healing is a natural process and does not need to be treated further. Application of
mineral oil and lotions may reduce the formation of scar tissue. However, modern cosmetic procedures, such as
dermabrasion, laser treatments, and filler injections have been invented as remedies for severe scarring. All of these
procedures try to reorganize the structure of the epidermis and underlying collagen tissue to make it look more
natural.
Bedsores and Stretch Marks
Skin and its underlying tissue can be affected by excessive pressure. One example of this is called a bedsore.
Bedsores, also called decubitis ulcers, are caused by constant, long-term, unrelieved pressure on certain body parts
that are bony, reducing blood flow to the area and leading to necrosis (tissue death). Bedsores are most common in
elderly patients who have debilitating conditions that cause them to be immobile. Most hospitals and long-term care
facilities have the practice of turning the patients every few hours to prevent the incidence of bedsores. If left
untreated by removal of necrotized tissue, bedsores can be fatal if they become infected.
The skin can also be affected by pressure associated with rapid growth. A stretch mark results when the dermis is
stretched beyond its limits of elasticity, as the skin stretches to accommodate the excess pressure. Stretch marks
usually accompany rapid weight gain during puberty and pregnancy. They initially have a reddish hue, but lighten
over time. Other than for cosmetic reasons, treatment of stretch marks is not required. They occur most commonly
over the hips and abdomen.
Calluses
When you wear shoes that do not fit well and are a constant source of abrasion on your toes, you tend to form a
callus at the point of contact. This occurs because the basal stem cells in the stratum basale are triggered to divide
more often to increase the thickness of the skin at the point of abrasion to protect the rest of the body from further
damage. This is an example of a minor or local injury, and the skin manages to react and treat the problem
independent of the rest of the body. Calluses can also form on your fingers if they are subject to constant
mechanical stress, such as long periods of writing, playing string instruments, or video games. A corn is a
specialized form of callus. Corns form from abrasions on the skin that result from an elliptical-type motion.
5.4 • Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
185
Key Terms
acne
skin condition due to infected sebaceous glands
albinism
genetic disorder that affects the skin, in
which there is no melanin production
anagen
active phase of the hair growth cycle
apocrine sweat gland
type of sweat gland that is
associated with hair follicles in the armpits and
genital regions
arrector pili
smooth muscle that is activated in
response to external stimuli that pull on hair
follicles and make the hair “stand up”
basal cell
type of stem cell found in the stratum
basale and in the hair matrix that continually
undergoes cell division, producing the keratinocytes
of the epidermis
basal cell carcinoma
cancer that originates from
basal cells in the epidermis of the skin
bedsore
sore on the skin that develops when regions
of the body start necrotizing due to constant
pressure and lack of blood supply; also called
decubitis ulcers
callus
thickened area of skin that arises due to
constant abrasion
catagen
transitional phase marking the end of the
anagen phase of the hair growth cycle
corn
type of callus that is named for its shape and the
elliptical motion of the abrasive force
cortex
in hair, the second or middle layer of
keratinocytes originating from the hair matrix, as
seen in a cross-section of the hair bulb
cuticle
in hair, the outermost layer of keratinocytes
originating from the hair matrix, as seen in a cross-
section of the hair bulb
dermal papilla
(plural = dermal papillae) extension of
the papillary layer of the dermis that increases
surface contact between the epidermis and dermis
dermis
layer of skin between the epidermis and
hypodermis, composed mainly of connective tissue
and containing blood vessels, hair follicles, sweat
glands, and other structures
desmosome
structure that forms an impermeable
junction between cells
eccrine sweat gland
type of sweat gland that is
common throughout the skin surface; it produces a
hypotonic sweat for thermoregulation
eczema
skin condition due to an allergic reaction,
which resembles a rash
elastin fibers
fibers made of the protein elastin that
increase the elasticity of the dermis
eleiden
clear protein-bound lipid found in the
stratum lucidum that is derived from keratohyalin
and helps to prevent water loss
epidermis
outermost tissue layer of the skin
eponychium
nail fold that meets the proximal end of
the nail body, also called the cuticle
external root sheath
outer layer of the hair follicle
that is an extension of the epidermis, which
encloses the hair root
first-degree burn
superficial burn that injures only
the epidermis
fourth-degree burn
burn in which full thickness of
the skin and underlying muscle and bone is
damaged
glassy membrane
layer of connective tissue that
surrounds the base of the hair follicle, connecting it
to the dermis
hair
keratinous filament growing out of the epidermis
hair bulb
structure at the base of the hair root that
surrounds the dermal papilla
hair follicle
cavity or sac from which hair originates
hair matrix
layer of basal cells from which a strand of
hair grows
hair papilla
mass of connective tissue, blood
capillaries, and nerve endings at the base of the hair
follicle
hair root
part of hair that is below the epidermis
anchored to the follicle
hair shaft
part of hair that is above the epidermis but
is not anchored to the follicle
hypodermis
connective tissue connecting the
integument to the underlying bone and muscle
hyponychium
thickened layer of stratum corneum
that lies below the free edge of the nail
integumentary system
skin and its accessory
structures
internal root sheath
innermost layer of keratinocytes
in the hair follicle that surround the hair root up to
the hair shaft
keloid
type of scar that has layers raised above the
skin surface
keratin
type of structural protein that gives skin, hair,
and nails its hard, water-resistant properties
keratinocyte
cell that produces keratin and is the
most predominant type of cell found in the
epidermis
keratohyalin
granulated protein found in the stratum
granulosum
Langerhans cell
specialized dendritic cell found in
the stratum spinosum that functions as a
macrophage
lunula
basal part of the nail body that consists of a
crescent-shaped layer of thick epithelium
medulla
in hair, the innermost layer of keratinocytes
originating from the hair matrix
Meissner corpuscle
(also, tactile corpuscle) receptor
186
5 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
in the skin that responds to light touch
melanin
pigment that determines the color of hair
and skin
melanocyte
cell found in the stratum basale of the
epidermis that produces the pigment melanin
melanoma
type of skin cancer that originates from
the melanocytes of the skin
melanosome
intercellular vesicle that transfers
melanin from melanocytes into keratinocytes of the
epidermis
Merkel cell
receptor cell in the stratum basale of the
epidermis that responds to the sense of touch
metastasis
spread of cancer cells from a source to
other parts of the body
nail bed
layer of epidermis upon which the nail body
forms
nail body
main keratinous plate that forms the nail
nail cuticle
fold of epithelium that extends over the
nail bed, also called the eponychium
nail fold
fold of epithelium at that extend over the
sides of the nail body, holding it in place
nail root
part of the nail that is lodged deep in the
epidermis from which the nail grows
Pacinian corpuscle
(also, lamellated corpuscle)
receptor in the skin that responds to vibration
papillary layer
superficial layer of the dermis, made
of loose, areolar connective tissue
reticular layer
deeper layer of the dermis; it has a
reticulated appearance due to the presence of
abundant collagen and elastin fibers
rickets
disease in children caused by vitamin D
deficiency, which leads to the weakening of bones
scar
collagen-rich skin formed after the process of
wound healing that is different from normal skin
sebaceous gland
type of oil gland found in the
dermis all over the body and helps to lubricate and
waterproof the skin and hair by secreting sebum
sebum
oily substance that is composed of a mixture
of lipids that lubricates the skin and hair
second-degree burn
partial-thickness burn that
injures the epidermis and a portion of the dermis
squamous cell carcinoma
type of skin cancer that
originates from the stratum spinosum of the
epidermis
stratum basale
deepest layer of the epidermis, made
of epidermal stem cells
stratum corneum
most superficial layer of the
epidermis
stratum granulosum
layer of the epidermis
superficial to the stratum spinosum
stratum lucidum
layer of the epidermis between the
stratum granulosum and stratum corneum, found
only in thick skin covering the palms, soles of the
feet, and digits
stratum spinosum
layer of the epidermis superficial
to the stratum basale, characterized by the
presence of desmosomes
stretch mark
mark formed on the skin due to a
sudden growth spurt and expansion of the dermis
beyond its elastic limits
sudoriferous gland
sweat gland
telogen
resting phase of the hair growth cycle
initiated with catagen and terminated by the
beginning of a new anagen phase of hair growth
third-degree burn
burn that penetrates and destroys
the full thickness of the skin (epidermis and dermis)
vitamin D
compound that aids absorption of calcium
and phosphates in the intestine to improve bone
health
vitiligo
skin condition in which melanocytes in certain
areas lose the ability to produce melanin, possibly
due an autoimmune reaction that leads to loss of
color in patches
Chapter Review
5.1 Layers of the Skin
The skin is composed of two major layers: a superficial
epidermis and a deeper dermis. The epidermis consists
of several layers beginning with the innermost
(deepest) stratum basale (germinatum), followed by
the stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum
lucidum (when present), and ending with the
outermost layer, the stratum corneum. The topmost
layer, the stratum corneum, consists of dead cells that
shed periodically and is progressively replaced by cells
formed from the basal layer. The stratum basale also
contains melanocytes, cells that produce melanin, the
pigment primarily responsible for giving skin its color.
Melanin is transferred to keratinocytes in the stratum
spinosum to protect cells from UV rays.
The dermis connects the epidermis to the hypodermis,
and provides strength and elasticity due to the
presence of collagen and elastin fibers. It has only two
layers: the papillary layer with papillae that extend into
the epidermis and the lower, reticular layer composed
of loose connective tissue. The hypodermis, deep to
the dermis of skin, is the connective tissue that
connects the dermis to underlying structures; it also
harbors adipose tissue for fat storage and protection.
5.2 Accessory Structures of the Skin
Accessory structures of the skin include hair, nails,
sweat glands, and sebaceous glands. Hair is made of
5 • Chapter Review
187
dead keratinized cells, and gets its color from melanin
pigments. Nails, also made of dead keratinized cells,
protect the extremities of our fingers and toes from
mechanical damage. Sweat glands and sebaceous
glands produce sweat and sebum, respectively. Each of
these fluids has a role to play in maintaining
homeostasis. Sweat cools the body surface when it
gets overheated and helps excrete small amounts of
metabolic waste. Sebum acts as a natural moisturizer
and keeps the dead, flaky, outer keratin layer healthy.
5.3 Functions of the Integumentary System
The skin plays important roles in protection, sensing
stimuli, thermoregulation, and vitamin D synthesis. It is
the first layer of defense to prevent dehydration,
infection, and injury to the rest of the body. Sweat
glands in the skin allow the skin surface to cool when
the body gets overheated. Thermoregulation is also
accomplished by the dilation or constriction of heat-
carrying blood vessels in the skin. Immune cells
present among the skin layers patrol the areas to keep
them free of foreign materials. Fat stores in the
hypodermis aid in both thermoregulation and
protection. Finally, the skin plays a role in the synthesis
of vitamin D, which is necessary for our well-being but
not easily available in natural foods.
5.4 Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the
Integumentary System
Skin cancer is a result of damage to the DNA of skin
cells, often due to excessive exposure to UV radiation.
Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are
highly curable, and arise from cells in the stratum
basale and stratum spinosum, respectively. Melanoma
is the most dangerous form of skin cancer, affecting
melanocytes, which can spread/metastasize to other
organs. Burns are an injury to the skin that occur as a
result of exposure to extreme heat, radiation, or
chemicals. First-degree and second-degree burns
usually heal quickly, but third-degree burns can be
fatal because they penetrate the full thickness of the
skin. Scars occur when there is repair of skin damage.
Fibroblasts generate scar tissue in the form of collagen,
which forms a basket-weave pattern that looks
different from normal skin.
Bedsores and stretch marks are the result of excessive
pressure on the skin and underlying tissue. Bedsores
are characterized by necrosis of tissue due to
immobility, whereas stretch marks result from rapid
growth. Eczema is an allergic reaction that manifests as
a rash, and acne results from clogged sebaceous
glands. Eczema and acne are usually long-term skin
conditions that may be treated successfully in mild
cases. Calluses and corns are the result of abrasive
pressure on the skin.
Interactive Link Questions
1. The skin consists of two layers and a closely
associated layer. View this animation
(http://openstax.org/l/layers) to learn more about
layers of the skin. What are the basic functions of
each of these layers?
2. Figure 5.4 If you zoom on the cells at the outermost
layer of this section of skin, what do you notice
about the cells?
3. Figure 5.6 If you zoom on the cells of the stratum
spinosum, what is distinctive about them?
4. This ABC video follows the story of a pair of
fraternal African-American twins, one of whom is
albino. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
albino) to learn about the challenges these children
and their family face. Which ethnicities do you think
are exempt from the possibility of albinism?
Review Questions
5. The papillary layer of the dermis is most closely
associated with which layer of the epidermis?
a.
stratum spinosum
b.
stratum corneum
c.
stratum granulosum
d.
stratum basale
6. Langerhans cells are commonly found in the
________.
a.
stratum spinosum
b.
stratum corneum
c.
stratum granulosum
d.
stratum basale
188
5 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
7. The papillary and reticular layers of the dermis are
composed mainly of ________.
a.
melanocytes
b.
keratinocytes
c.
connective tissue
d.
adipose tissue
8. Collagen lends ________ to the skin.
a.
elasticity
b.
structure
c.
color
d.
UV protection
9. Which of the following is not a function of the
hypodermis?
a.
protects underlying organs
b.
helps maintain body temperature
c.
source of blood vessels in the epidermis
d.
a site to long-term energy storage
10. In response to stimuli from the sympathetic
nervous system, the arrector pili ________.
a.
are glands on the skin surface
b.
can lead to excessive sweating
c.
are responsible for goose bumps
d.
secrete sebum
11. The hair matrix contains ________.
a.
the hair follicle
b.
the hair shaft
c.
the glassy membrane
d.
a layer of basal cells
12. Eccrine sweat glands ________.
a.
are present on hair
b.
are present in the skin throughout the body
and produce watery sweat
c.
produce sebum
d.
act as a moisturizer
13. Sebaceous glands ________.
a.
are a type of sweat gland
b.
are associated with hair follicles
c.
may function in response to touch
d.
release a watery solution of salt and
metabolic waste
14. Similar to the hair, nails grow continuously
throughout our lives. Which of the following is
furthest from the nail growth center?
a.
nail bed
b.
hyponychium
c.
nail root
d.
eponychium
15. In humans, exposure of the skin to sunlight is
required for ________.
a.
vitamin D synthesis
b.
arteriole constriction
c.
folate production
d.
thermoregulation
16. One of the functions of the integumentary system
is protection. Which of the following does not
directly contribute to that function?
a.
stratum lucidum
b.
desmosomes
c.
folic acid synthesis
d.
Merkel cells
17. An individual using a sharp knife notices a small
amount of blood where he just cut himself. Which
of the following layers of skin did he have to cut
into in order to bleed?
a.
stratum corneum
b.
stratum basale
c.
papillary dermis
d.
stratum granulosum
18. As you are walking down the beach, you see a
dead, dry, shriveled-up fish. Which layer of your
epidermis keeps you from drying out?
a.
stratum corneum
b.
stratum basale
c.
stratum spinosum
d.
stratum granulosum
19. If you cut yourself and bacteria enter the wound,
which of the following cells would help get rid of
the bacteria?
a.
Merkel cells
b.
keratinocytes
c.
Langerhans cells
d.
melanocytes
20. In general, skin cancers ________.
a.
are easily treatable and not a major health
concern
b.
occur due to poor hygiene
c.
can be reduced by limiting exposure to the
sun
d.
affect only the epidermis
21. Bedsores ________.
a.
can be treated with topical moisturizers
b.
can result from deep massages
c.
are preventable by eliminating pressure
points
d.
are caused by dry skin
5 • Review Questions
189
22. An individual has spent too much time sun
bathing. Not only is their skin painful to touch, but
small blisters have appeared in the affected area.
This indicates that they have damaged which
layers of skin?
a.
epidermis only
b.
hypodermis only
c.
epidermis and hypodermis
d.
epidermis and dermis
23. After a skin injury, the body initiates a wound-
healing response. The first step of this response is
the formation of a blood clot to stop bleeding.
Which of the following would be the next
response?
a.
increased production of melanin by
melanocytes
b.
increased production of connective tissue
c.
an increase in Pacinian corpuscles around the
wound
d.
an increased activity in the stratum lucidum
24. Squamous cell carcinomas are the second most
common of the skin cancers and are capable of
metastasizing if not treated. This cancer affects
which cells?
a.
basal cells of the stratum basale
b.
melanocytes of the stratum basale
c.
keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum
d.
Langerhans cells of the stratum lucidum
Critical Thinking Questions
25. What determines the color of skin, and what is the
process that darkens skin when it is exposed to UV
light?
26. Cells of the epidermis derive from stem cells of
the stratum basale. Describe how the cells change
as they become integrated into the different layers
of the epidermis.
27. Explain the differences between eccrine and
apocrine sweat glands.
28. Describe the structure and composition of nails.
29. Why do people sweat excessively when exercising
outside on a hot day?
30. Explain your skin’s response to a drop in body core
temperature.
31. Why do teenagers often experience acne?
32. Why do scars look different from surrounding
skin?
190
5 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 6
Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
List and describe the functions of bones
•
Describe the classes of bones
•
Discuss the process of bone formation and development
•
Explain how bone repairs itself after a fracture
•
Discuss the effect of exercise, nutrition, and hormones on bone tissue
•
Describe how an imbalance of calcium can affect bone tissue
Bones make good fossils. While the soft tissue of a once living organism will decay and fall away
over time, bone tissue will, under the right conditions, undergo a process of mineralization, effectively turning the
bone to stone. A well-preserved fossil skeleton can give us a good sense of the size and shape of an organism, just
as your skeleton helps to define your size and shape. Unlike a fossil skeleton, however, your skeleton is a structure
of living tissue that grows, repairs, and renews itself. The bones within it are dynamic and complex organs that serve
a number of important functions, including some necessary to maintain homeostasis.
6.1 The Functions of the Skeletal System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define bone, cartilage, and the skeletal system
•
List and describe the functions of the skeletal system
Bone, or osseous tissue, is a hard, dense connective tissue that forms most of the adult skeleton, the support
structure of the body. In the areas of the skeleton where bones move (for example, the ribcage and joints),
cartilage, a semi-rigid form of connective tissue, provides flexibility and smooth surfaces for movement. The
skeletal system is the body system composed of bones and cartilage and performs the following critical functions
for the human body:
Figure 6.1
Child Looking at Bones Bone is a living tissue. Unlike the bones of a fossil made inert by a process of mineralization, a child’s
bones will continue to grow and develop while contributing to the support and function of other body systems. (credit: James Emery)
•
supports the body
•
facilitates movement
•
protects internal organs
•
produces blood cells
•
stores and releases minerals and fat
Support, Movement, and Protection
The most apparent functions of the skeletal system are the gross functions—those visible by observation. Simply by
looking at a person, you can see how the bones support, facilitate movement, and protect the human body.
Just as the steel beams of a building provide a scaffold to support its weight, the bones and cartilage of your
skeletal system compose the scaffold that supports the rest of your body. Without the skeletal system, you would be
a limp mass of organs, muscle, and skin.
Bones also facilitate movement by serving as points of attachment for your muscles. While some bones only serve
as a support for the muscles, others also transmit the forces produced when your muscles contract. From a
mechanical point of view, bones act as levers and joints serve as fulcrums (Figure 6.2). Unless a muscle spans a
joint and contracts, a bone is not going to move. For information on the interaction of the skeletal and muscular
systems, that is, the musculoskeletal system, seek additional content.
FIGURE 6.2
Bones Support Movement
Bones act as levers when muscles span a joint and contract. (credit: Benjamin J. DeLong)
Bones also protect internal organs from injury by covering or surrounding them. For example, your ribs protect your
lungs and heart, the bones of your vertebral column (spine) protect your spinal cord, and the bones of your cranium
(skull) protect your brain (Figure 6.3).
192
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.3
Bones Protect Brain
The cranium completely surrounds and protects the brain from non-traumatic injury.
CAREER CONNECTION
Orthopedist
An orthopedist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating disorders and injuries related to the
musculoskeletal system. Some orthopedic problems can be treated with medications, exercises, braces, and other
devices, but others may be best treated with surgery (Figure 6.4).
FIGURE 6.4
Complex Brace
An orthopedist will sometimes prescribe the use of a brace that reinforces the underlying bone structure it
is being used to support. (credit: Becky Stern/Flickr)
While the origin of the word “orthopedics” (ortho- = “straight”; paed- = “child”), literally means “straightening of the
child,” orthopedists can have patients who range from pediatric to geriatric. In recent years, orthopedists have even
performed prenatal surgery to correct spina bifida, a congenital defect in which the neural canal in the spine of the
fetus fails to close completely during embryologic development.
Orthopedists commonly treat bone and joint injuries but they also treat other bone conditions including curvature of
6.1 • The Functions of the Skeletal System
193
the spine. Lateral curvatures (scoliosis) can be severe enough to slip under the shoulder blade (scapula) forcing it up
as a hump. Spinal curvatures can also be excessive dorsoventrally (kyphosis) causing a hunch back and thoracic
compression. These curvatures often appear in preteens as the result of poor posture, abnormal growth, or
indeterminate causes. Mostly, they are readily treated by orthopedists. As people age, accumulated spinal column
injuries and diseases like osteoporosis can also lead to curvatures of the spine, hence the stooping you sometimes
see in the elderly.
Some orthopedists sub-specialize in sports medicine, which addresses both simple injuries, such as a sprained
ankle, and complex injuries, such as a torn rotator cuff in the shoulder. Treatment can range from exercise to
surgery.
Mineral Storage, Energy Storage, and Hematopoiesis
On a metabolic level, bone tissue performs several critical functions. For one, the bone matrix acts as a reservoir for
a number of minerals important to the functioning of the body, especially calcium, and phosphorus. These minerals,
incorporated into bone tissue, can be released back into the bloodstream to maintain levels needed to support
physiological processes. Calcium ions, for example, are essential for muscle contractions and controlling the flow of
other ions involved in the transmission of nerve impulses.
Bone also serves as a site for fat storage and blood cell production. The softer connective tissue that fills the interior
of most bone is referred to as bone marrow (Figure 6.5). There are two types of bone marrow: yellow marrow and
red marrow. Yellow marrow contains adipose tissue; the triglycerides stored in the adipocytes of the tissue can
serve as a source of energy. Red marrow is where hematopoiesis—the production of blood cells—takes place. Red
blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets are all produced in the red marrow.
FIGURE 6.5
Head of Femur Showing Red and Yellow Marrow
The head of the femur contains both yellow and red marrow. Yellow
marrow stores fat. Red marrow is responsible for hematopoiesis. (credit: modification of work by “stevenfruitsmaak”/Wikimedia Commons)
6.2 Bone Classification
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Classify bones according to their shapes
•
Describe the function of each category of bones
The 206 bones that compose the adult skeleton are divided into five categories based on their shapes (Figure 6.6).
Their shapes and their functions are related such that each categorical shape of bone has a distinct function.
194
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.6
Classifications of Bones
Bones are classified according to their shape.
Long Bones
A long bone is one that is cylindrical in shape, being longer than it is wide. Keep in mind, however, that the term
describes the shape of a bone, not its size. Long bones are found in the arms (humerus, ulna, radius) and legs
(femur, tibia, fibula), as well as in the fingers (metacarpals, phalanges) and toes (metatarsals, phalanges). Long
bones function as levers; they move when muscles contract.
Short Bones
A short bone is one that is cube-like in shape, being approximately equal in length, width, and thickness. The only
short bones in the human skeleton are in the carpals of the wrists and the tarsals of the ankles. Short bones provide
stability and support as well as some limited motion.
6.2 • Bone Classification
195
Flat Bones
The term “flat bone” is somewhat of a misnomer because, although a flat bone is typically thin, it is also often
curved. Examples include the cranial (skull) bones, the scapulae (shoulder blades), the sternum (breastbone), and
the ribs. Flat bones serve as points of attachment for muscles and often protect internal organs.
Irregular Bones
An irregular bone is one that does not have any easily characterized shape and therefore does not fit any other
classification. These bones tend to have more complex shapes, like the vertebrae that support the spinal cord and
protect it from compressive forces. Many facial bones, particularly the ones containing sinuses, are classified as
irregular bones.
Sesamoid Bones
A sesamoid bone is a small, round bone that, as the name suggests, is shaped like a sesame seed. These bones
form in tendons (the sheaths of tissue that connect bones to muscles) where a great deal of pressure is generated in
a joint. The sesamoid bones protect tendons by helping them overcome compressive forces. Sesamoid bones vary in
number and placement from person to person but are typically found in tendons associated with the feet, hands,
and knees. The patellae (singular = patella) are the only sesamoid bones found in common with every person. Table
6.1 reviews bone classifications with their associated features, functions, and examples.
Bone Classifications
Bone
classification
Features
Function(s)
Examples
Long
Cylinder-like shape, longer
than it is wide
Leverage
Femur, tibia, fibula, metatarsals,
humerus, ulna, radius,
metacarpals, phalanges
Short
Cube-like shape,
approximately equal in
length, width, and thickness
Provide stability, support,
while allowing for some
motion
Carpals, tarsals
Flat
Thin and curved
Points of attachment for
muscles; protectors of
internal organs
Sternum, ribs, scapulae, cranial
bones
Irregular
Complex shape
Protect internal organs
Vertebrae, facial bones
Sesamoid
Small and round; embedded
in tendons
Protect tendons from
compressive forces
Patellae
TABLE 6.1
6.3 Bone Structure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the anatomical features of a bone
•
Define and list examples of bone markings
•
Describe the histology of bone tissue
•
Compare and contrast compact and spongy bone
•
Identify the structures that compose compact and spongy bone
•
Describe how bones are nourished and innervated
196
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
Bone tissue (osseous tissue) differs greatly from other tissues in the body. Bone is hard and many of its functions
depend on that characteristic hardness. Later discussions in this chapter will show that bone is also dynamic in that
its shape adjusts to accommodate stresses. This section will examine the gross anatomy of bone first and then
move on to its histology.
Gross Anatomy of Bone
The structure of a long bone allows for the best visualization of all of the parts of a bone (Figure 6.7). A long bone
has two parts: the diaphysis and the epiphysis. The diaphysis is the tubular shaft that runs between the proximal
and distal ends of the bone. The hollow region in the diaphysis is called the medullary cavity, which is filled with
yellow marrow. The walls of the diaphysis are composed of dense and hard compact bone.
FIGURE 6.7
Anatomy of a Long Bone
A typical long bone shows the gross anatomical characteristics of bone.
The wider section at each end of the bone is called the epiphysis (plural = epiphyses), which is filled with spongy
bone. Red marrow fills the spaces in the spongy bone. Each epiphysis meets the diaphysis at the metaphysis, the
narrow area that contains the epiphyseal plate (growth plate), a layer of hyaline (transparent) cartilage in a growing
bone. When the bone stops growing in early adulthood (approximately 18–21 years), the cartilage is replaced by
osseous tissue and the epiphyseal plate becomes an epiphyseal line.
The medullary cavity has a delicate membranous lining called the endosteum (end- = “inside”; oste- = “bone”),
where bone growth, repair, and remodeling occur. The outer surface of the bone is covered with a fibrous membrane
called the periosteum (peri- = “around” or “surrounding”). The periosteum contains blood vessels, nerves, and
lymphatic vessels that nourish compact bone. Tendons and ligaments also attach to bones at the periosteum. The
6.3 • Bone Structure
197
periosteum covers the entire outer surface except where the epiphyses meet other bones to form joints (Figure 6.8).
In this region, the epiphyses are covered with articular cartilage, a thin layer of cartilage that reduces friction and
acts as a shock absorber.
FIGURE 6.8
Periosteum and Endosteum
The periosteum forms the outer surface of bone, and the endosteum lines the medullary
cavity.
Flat bones, like those of the cranium, consist of a layer of diploë (spongy bone), lined on either side by a layer of
compact bone (Figure 6.9). The two layers of compact bone and the interior spongy bone work together to protect
the internal organs. If the outer layer of a cranial bone fractures, the brain is still protected by the intact inner layer.
FIGURE 6.9
Anatomy of a Flat Bone
This cross-section of a flat bone shows the spongy bone (diploë) lined on either side by a layer of
compact bone.
Bone Markings
The surface features of bones vary considerably, depending on the function and location in the body. Table 6.2
describes the bone markings, which are illustrated in (Figure 6.10). There are three general classes of bone
markings: (1) articulations, (2) projections, and (3) holes. As the name implies, an articulation is where two bone
surfaces come together (articulus = “joint”). These surfaces tend to conform to one another, such as one being
rounded and the other cupped, to facilitate the function of the articulation. A projection is an area of a bone that
projects above the surface of the bone. These are the attachment points for tendons and ligaments. In general, their
size and shape is an indication of the forces exerted through the attachment to the bone. A hole is an opening or
groove in the bone that allows blood vessels and nerves to enter the bone. As with the other markings, their size and
shape reflect the size of the vessels and nerves that penetrate the bone at these points.
198
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
Bone Markings
Marking
Description
Example
Articulations
Where two bones meet
Knee joint
Head
Prominent rounded surface
Head of femur
Facet
Flat surface
Vertebrae
Condyle
Rounded surface
Occipital condyles
Projections
Raised markings
Spinous process of the vertebrae
Protuberance
Protruding
Chin
Process
Prominence feature
Transverse process of vertebra
Spine
Sharp process
Ischial spine
Tubercle
Small, rounded process
Tubercle of humerus
Tuberosity
Rough surface
Deltoid tuberosity
Line
Slight, elongated ridge
Temporal lines of the parietal bones
Crest
Ridge
Iliac crest
Holes
Holes and depressions
Foramen (holes through which blood vessels can pass through)
Fossa
Elongated basin
Mandibular fossa
Fovea
Small pit
Fovea capitis on the head of the femur
Sulcus
Groove
Sigmoid sulcus of the temporal bones
Canal
Passage in bone
Auditory canal
Fissure
Slit through bone
Auricular fissure
Foramen
Hole through bone
Foramen magnum in the occipital bone
Meatus
Opening into canal
External auditory meatus
Sinus
Air-filled space in bone
Nasal sinus
TABLE 6.2
6.3 • Bone Structure
199
FIGURE 6.10
Bone Features
The surface features of bones depend on their function, location, attachment of ligaments and tendons, or
the penetration of blood vessels and nerves.
Bone Cells and Tissue
Bone contains a relatively small number of cells entrenched in a matrix of collagen fibers that provide a surface for
inorganic salt crystals to adhere. These salt crystals form when calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate combine
to create hydroxyapatite, which incorporates other inorganic salts like magnesium hydroxide, fluoride, and sulfate as
it crystallizes, or calcifies, on the collagen fibers. The hydroxyapatite crystals give bones their hardness and
strength, while the collagen fibers give them flexibility so that they are not brittle.
Although bone cells compose a small amount of the bone volume, they are crucial to the function of bones. Four
types of cells are found within bone tissue: osteoblasts, osteocytes, osteogenic cells, and osteoclasts (Figure 6.11).
200
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.11
Bone Cells
Four types of cells are found within bone tissue. Osteogenic cells are undifferentiated and develop into
osteoblasts. When osteoblasts get trapped within the calcified matrix, their structure and function changes, and they become osteocytes.
Osteoclasts develop from monocytes and macrophages and differ in appearance from other bone cells.
The osteoblast is the bone cell responsible for forming new bone and is found in the growing portions of bone,
including the periosteum and endosteum. Osteoblasts, which do not divide, synthesize and secrete the collagen
matrix and calcium salts. As the secreted matrix surrounding the osteoblast calcifies, the osteoblast become
trapped within it; as a result, it changes in structure and becomes an osteocyte, the primary cell of mature bone and
the most common type of bone cell. Each osteocyte is located in a space called a lacuna and is surrounded by bone
tissue. Osteocytes maintain the mineral concentration of the matrix via the secretion of enzymes. Like osteoblasts,
osteocytes lack mitotic activity. They can communicate with each other and receive nutrients via long cytoplasmic
processes that extend through canaliculi (singular = canaliculus), channels within the bone matrix.
If osteoblasts and osteocytes are incapable of mitosis, then how are they replenished when old ones die? The
answer lies in the properties of a third category of bone cells—the osteogenic cell. These osteogenic cells are
undifferentiated with high mitotic activity and they are the only bone cells that divide. Immature osteogenic cells are
found in the deep layers of the periosteum and the marrow. They differentiate and develop into osteoblasts.
The dynamic nature of bone means that new tissue is constantly formed, and old, injured, or unnecessary bone is
dissolved for repair or for calcium release. The cell responsible for bone resorption, or breakdown, is the osteoclast.
They are found on bone surfaces, are multinucleated, and originate from monocytes and macrophages, two types of
white blood cells, not from osteogenic cells. Osteoclasts are continually breaking down old bone while osteoblasts
are continually forming new bone. The ongoing balance between osteoblasts and osteoclasts is responsible for the
constant but subtle reshaping of bone. Table 6.3 reviews the bone cells, their functions, and locations.
Bone Cells
Cell type
Function
Location
Osteogenic
cells
Develop into osteoblasts
Deep layers of the periosteum and the marrow
Osteoblasts
Bone formation
Growing portions of bone, including periosteum and
endosteum
TABLE 6.3
6.3 • Bone Structure
201
Cell type
Function
Location
Osteocytes
Maintain mineral concentration of
matrix
Entrapped in matrix
Osteoclasts
Bone resorption
Bone surfaces and at sites of old, injured, or unneeded
bone
TABLE 6.3
Compact and Spongy Bone
The differences between compact and spongy bone are best explored via their histology. Most bones contain
compact and spongy osseous tissue, but their distribution and concentration vary based on the bone’s overall
function. Compact bone is dense so that it can withstand compressive forces, while spongy (cancellous) bone has
open spaces and supports shifts in weight distribution.
Compact Bone
Compact bone is the denser, stronger of the two types of bone tissue (Figure 6.12). It can be found under the
periosteum and in the diaphyses of long bones, where it provides support and protection.
202
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.12
Diagram of Compact Bone
(a) This cross-sectional view of compact bone shows the basic structural unit, the osteon. (b)
In this micrograph of the osteon, you can clearly see the concentric lamellae and central canals. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The microscopic structural unit of compact bone is called an osteon, or Haversian system. Each osteon is composed
of concentric rings of calcified matrix called lamellae (singular = lamella). Running down the center of each osteon is
the central canal, or Haversian canal, which contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. These vessels
and nerves branch off at right angles through a perforating canal, also known as Volkmann’s canals, to extend to
the periosteum and endosteum.
The osteocytes are located inside spaces called lacunae (singular = lacuna), found at the borders of adjacent
lamellae. As described earlier, canaliculi connect with the canaliculi of other lacunae and eventually with the central
canal. This system allows nutrients to be transported to the osteocytes and wastes to be removed from them.
Spongy (Cancellous) Bone
Like compact bone, spongy bone, also known as cancellous bone, contains osteocytes housed in lacunae, but they
are not arranged in concentric circles. Instead, the lacunae and osteocytes are found in a lattice-like network of
matrix spikes called trabeculae (singular = trabecula) (Figure 6.13). The trabeculae may appear to be a random
network, but each trabecula forms along lines of stress to provide strength to the bone. The spaces of the
trabeculated network provide balance to the dense and heavy compact bone by making bones lighter so that
muscles can move them more easily. In addition, the spaces in some spongy bones contain red marrow, protected
by the trabeculae, where hematopoiesis occurs.
6.3 • Bone Structure
203
FIGURE 6.13
Diagram of Spongy Bone
Spongy bone is composed of trabeculae that contain the osteocytes. Red marrow fills the
spaces in some bones.
Aging and the...
Skeletal System: Paget’s Disease
Paget’s disease usually occurs in adults over age 40. It is a disorder of the bone remodeling process that begins
with overactive osteoclasts. This means more bone is resorbed than is laid down. The osteoblasts try to
compensate but the new bone they lay down is weak and brittle and therefore prone to fracture.
While some people with Paget’s disease have no symptoms, others experience pain, bone fractures, and bone
deformities (Figure 6.14). Bones of the pelvis, skull, spine, and legs are the most commonly affected. When
occurring in the skull, Paget’s disease can cause headaches and hearing loss.
FIGURE 6.14
Paget's Disease
Normal leg bones are relatively straight, but those affected by Paget’s disease are porous and
curved.
204
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
Blood and Nerve Supply
The spongy bone and medullary cavity receive nourishment from arteries that pass through the compact bone. The
arteries enter through the nutrient foramen (plural = foramina), small openings in the diaphysis (Figure 6.15). The
osteocytes in spongy bone are nourished by blood vessels of the periosteum that penetrate spongy bone and blood
that circulates in the marrow cavities. As the blood passes through the marrow cavities, it is collected by veins,
which then pass out of the bone through the foramina.
In addition to the blood vessels, nerves follow the same paths into the bone where they tend to concentrate in the
more metabolically active regions of the bone. The nerves sense pain, and it appears the nerves also play roles in
regulating blood supplies and in bone growth, hence their concentrations in metabolically active sites of the bone.
FIGURE 6.15
Diagram of Blood and Nerve Supply to Bone
Blood vessels and nerves enter the bone through the nutrient foramen.
What causes the osteoclasts to become overactive? The answer is still unknown, but hereditary factors seem to
play a role. Some scientists believe Paget’s disease is due to an as-yet-unidentified virus.
Paget’s disease is diagnosed via imaging studies and lab tests. X-rays may show bone deformities or areas of
bone resorption. Bone scans are also useful. In these studies, a dye containing a radioactive ion is injected into
the body. Areas of bone resorption have an affinity for the ion, so they will light up on the scan if the ions are
absorbed. In addition, blood levels of an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase are typically elevated in people
with Paget’s disease.
Bisphosphonates, drugs that decrease the activity of osteoclasts, are often used in the treatment of Paget’s
disease. However, in a small percentage of cases, bisphosphonates themselves have been linked to an
increased risk of fractures because the old bone that is left after bisphosphonates are administered becomes
worn out and brittle. Still, most doctors feel that the benefits of bisphosphonates more than outweigh the risk;
the medical professional has to weigh the benefits and risks on a case-by-case basis. Bisphosphonate treatment
can reduce the overall risk of deformities or fractures, which in turn reduces the risk of surgical repair and its
associated risks and complications.
6.3 • Bone Structure
205
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/microbone) to see the microscopic features of a bone.
6.4 Bone Formation and Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the function of cartilage
•
List the steps of intramembranous ossification
•
List the steps of endochondral ossification
•
Explain the growth activity at the epiphyseal plate
•
Compare and contrast the processes of modeling and remodeling
In the early stages of embryonic development, the embryo’s skeleton consists of fibrous membranes and hyaline
cartilage. By the sixth or seventh week of embryonic life, the actual process of bone development, ossification
(osteogenesis), begins. There are two osteogenic pathways—intramembranous ossification and endochondral
ossification—but bone is the same regardless of the pathway that produces it.
Cartilage Templates
Bone is a replacement tissue; that is, it uses a model tissue on which to lay down its mineral matrix. For skeletal
development, the most common template is cartilage. During fetal development, a framework is laid down that
determines where bones will form. This framework is a flexible, semi-solid matrix produced by chondroblasts and
consists of hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfate, collagen fibers, and water. As the matrix surrounds and isolates
chondroblasts, they are called chondrocytes. Unlike most connective tissues, cartilage is avascular, meaning that it
has no blood vessels supplying nutrients and removing metabolic wastes. All of these functions are carried on by
diffusion through the matrix. This is why damaged cartilage does not repair itself as readily as most tissues do.
Throughout fetal development and into childhood growth and development, bone forms on the cartilaginous matrix.
By the time a fetus is born, most of the cartilage has been replaced with bone. Some additional cartilage will be
replaced throughout childhood, and some cartilage remains in the adult skeleton.
Intramembranous Ossification
During intramembranous ossification, compact and spongy bone develops directly from sheets of mesenchymal
(undifferentiated) connective tissue. The flat bones of the face, most of the cranial bones, and the clavicles
(collarbones) are formed via intramembranous ossification.
The process begins when mesenchymal cells in the embryonic skeleton gather together and begin to differentiate
into specialized cells (Figure 6.16a). Some of these cells will differentiate into capillaries, while others will become
osteogenic cells and then osteoblasts. Although they will ultimately be spread out by the formation of bone tissue,
early osteoblasts appear in a cluster called an ossification center.
The osteoblasts secrete osteoid, uncalcified matrix, which calcifies (hardens) within a few days as mineral salts are
deposited on it, thereby entrapping the osteoblasts within. Once entrapped, the osteoblasts become osteocytes
(Figure 6.16b). As osteoblasts transform into osteocytes, osteogenic cells in the surrounding connective tissue
differentiate into new osteoblasts.
Osteoid (unmineralized bone matrix) secreted around the capillaries results in a trabecular matrix, while osteoblasts
on the surface of the spongy bone become the periosteum (Figure 6.16c). The periosteum then creates a protective
layer of compact bone superficial to the trabecular bone. The trabecular bone crowds nearby blood vessels, which
eventually condense into red marrow (Figure 6.16d).
206
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.16
Intramembranous Ossification
Intramembranous ossification follows four steps. (a) Mesenchymal cells group into
clusters, and ossification centers form. (b) Secreted osteoid traps osteoblasts, which then become osteocytes. (c) Trabecular matrix and
periosteum form. (d) Compact bone develops superficial to the trabecular bone, and crowded blood vessels condense into red marrow.
Intramembranous ossification begins in utero during fetal development and continues on into adolescence. At birth,
the skull and clavicles are not fully ossified nor are the sutures of the skull closed. This allows the skull and
shoulders to deform during passage through the birth canal. The last bones to ossify via intramembranous
ossification are the flat bones of the face, which reach their adult size at the end of the adolescent growth spurt.
Endochondral Ossification
In endochondral ossification, bone develops by replacing hyaline cartilage. Cartilage does not become bone.
Instead, cartilage serves as a template to be completely replaced by new bone. Endochondral ossification takes
much longer than intramembranous ossification. Bones at the base of the skull and long bones form via
endochondral ossification.
In a long bone, for example, at about 6 to 8 weeks after conception, some of the mesenchymal cells differentiate
into chondrocytes (cartilage cells) that form the cartilaginous skeletal precursor of the bones (Figure 6.17a). Soon
after, the perichondrium, a membrane that covers the cartilage, appears Figure 6.17b).
6.4 • Bone Formation and Development
207
FIGURE 6.17
Endochondral Ossification
Endochondral ossification follows five steps. (a) Mesenchymal cells differentiate into
chondrocytes. (b) The cartilage model of the future bony skeleton and the perichondrium form. (c) Capillaries penetrate cartilage.
Perichondrium transforms into periosteum. Periosteal collar develops. Primary ossification center develops. (d) Cartilage and chondrocytes
continue to grow at ends of the bone. (e) Secondary ossification centers develop. (f) Cartilage remains at epiphyseal (growth) plate and at
joint surface as articular cartilage.
As more matrix is produced, the chondrocytes in the center of the cartilaginous model grow in size. As the matrix
208
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
calcifies, nutrients can no longer reach the chondrocytes. This results in their death and the disintegration of the
surrounding cartilage. Blood vessels invade the resulting spaces, not only enlarging the cavities but also carrying
osteogenic cells with them, many of which will become osteoblasts. These enlarging spaces eventually combine to
become the medullary cavity.
As the cartilage grows, capillaries penetrate it. This penetration initiates the transformation of the perichondrium
into the bone-producing periosteum. Here, the osteoblasts form a periosteal collar of compact bone around the
cartilage of the diaphysis. By the second or third month of fetal life, bone cell development and ossification ramps
up and creates the primary ossification center, a region deep in the periosteal collar where ossification begins
(Figure 6.17c).
While these deep changes are occurring, chondrocytes and cartilage continue to grow at the ends of the bone (the
future epiphyses), which increases the bone’s length at the same time bone is replacing cartilage in the diaphyses.
By the time the fetal skeleton is fully formed, cartilage only remains at the joint surface as articular cartilage and
between the diaphysis and epiphysis as the epiphyseal plate, the latter of which is responsible for the longitudinal
growth of bones. After birth, this same sequence of events (matrix mineralization, death of chondrocytes, invasion of
blood vessels from the periosteum, and seeding with osteogenic cells that become osteoblasts) occurs in the
epiphyseal regions, and each of these centers of activity is referred to as a secondary ossification center (Figure
6.17e).
How Bones Grow in Length
The epiphyseal plate is the area of growth in a long bone. It is a layer of hyaline cartilage where ossification occurs in
immature bones. On the epiphyseal side of the epiphyseal plate, cartilage is formed. On the diaphyseal side,
cartilage is ossified, and the diaphysis grows in length. The epiphyseal plate is composed of four zones of cells and
activity (Figure 6.18). The reserve zone is the region closest to the epiphyseal end of the plate and contains small
chondrocytes within the matrix. These chondrocytes do not participate in bone growth but secure the epiphyseal
plate to the osseous tissue of the epiphysis.
6.4 • Bone Formation and Development
209
FIGURE 6.18
Longitudinal Bone Growth
The epiphyseal plate is responsible for longitudinal bone growth.
The proliferative zone is the next layer toward the diaphysis and contains stacks of slightly larger chondrocytes. It
makes new chondrocytes (via mitosis) to replace those that die at the diaphyseal end of the plate. Chondrocytes in
the next layer, the zone of maturation and hypertrophy, are older and larger than those in the proliferative zone.
The more mature cells are situated closer to the diaphyseal end of the plate. The longitudinal growth of bone is a
result of cellular division in the proliferative zone and the maturation of cells in the zone of maturation and
hypertrophy.
Most of the chondrocytes in the zone of calcified matrix, the zone closest to the diaphysis, are dead because the
matrix around them has calcified. Capillaries and osteoblasts from the diaphysis penetrate this zone, and the
osteoblasts secrete bone tissue on the remaining calcified cartilage. Thus, the zone of calcified matrix connects the
epiphyseal plate to the diaphysis. A bone grows in length when osseous tissue is added to the diaphysis.
Bones continue to grow in length until early adulthood. The rate of growth is controlled by hormones, which will be
discussed later. When the chondrocytes in the epiphyseal plate cease their proliferation and bone replaces the
cartilage, longitudinal growth stops. All that remains of the epiphyseal plate is the epiphyseal line (Figure 6.19).
210
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.19
Progression from Epiphyseal Plate to Epiphyseal Line
As a bone matures, the epiphyseal plate progresses to an
epiphyseal line. (a) Epiphyseal plates are visible in a growing bone. (b) Epiphyseal lines are the remnants of epiphyseal plates in a mature
bone.
How Bones Grow in Diameter
While bones are increasing in length, they are also increasing in diameter; growth in diameter can continue even
after longitudinal growth ceases. This is called appositional growth. Osteoclasts resorb old bone that lines the
medullary cavity, while osteoblasts, via intramembranous ossification, produce new bone tissue beneath the
periosteum. The erosion of old bone along the medullary cavity and the deposition of new bone beneath the
periosteum not only increase the diameter of the diaphysis but also increase the diameter of the medullary cavity.
This process is called modeling.
Bone Remodeling
The process in which matrix is resorbed on one surface of a bone and deposited on another is known as bone
modeling. Modeling primarily takes place during a bone’s growth. However, in adult life, bone undergoes
remodeling, in which resorption of old or damaged bone takes place on the same surface where osteoblasts lay
new bone to replace that which is resorbed. Injury, exercise, and other activities lead to remodeling. Those
influences are discussed later in the chapter, but even without injury or exercise, about 5 to 10 percent of the
skeleton is remodeled annually just by destroying old bone and renewing it with fresh bone.
Diseases of the…
Skeletal System
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disease in which bones do not form properly and
therefore are fragile and break easily. It is also called brittle bone disease. The disease is present from birth and
affects a person throughout life.
The genetic mutation that causes OI affects the body’s production of collagen, one of the critical components of
bone matrix. The severity of the disease can range from mild to severe. Those with the most severe forms of the
disease sustain many more fractures than those with a mild form. Frequent and multiple fractures typically lead
to bone deformities and short stature. Bowing of the long bones and curvature of the spine are also common in
people afflicted with OI. Curvature of the spine makes breathing difficult because the lungs are compressed.
Because collagen is such an important structural protein in many parts of the body, people with OI may also
experience fragile skin, weak muscles, loose joints, easy bruising, frequent nosebleeds, brittle teeth, blue sclera,
and hearing loss. There is no known cure for OI. Treatment focuses on helping the person retain as much
independence as possible while minimizing fractures and maximizing mobility. Toward that end, safe exercises,
6.4 • Bone Formation and Development
211
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/bonegrows) to see how a bone grows.
6.5 Fractures: Bone Repair
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Differentiate among the different types of fractures
•
Describe the steps involved in bone repair
A fracture is a broken bone. It will heal whether or not a physician resets it in its anatomical position. If the bone is
not reset correctly, the healing process will keep the bone in its deformed position.
When a broken bone is manipulated and set into its natural position without surgery, the procedure is called a
closed reduction. Open reduction requires surgery to expose the fracture and reset the bone. While some fractures
can be minor, others are quite severe and result in grave complications. For example, a fractured diaphysis of the
femur has the potential to release fat globules into the bloodstream. These can become lodged in the capillary beds
of the lungs, leading to respiratory distress and if not treated quickly, death.
Types of Fractures
Fractures are classified by their complexity, location, and other features (Figure 6.20). Table 6.4 outlines common
types of fractures. Some fractures may be described using more than one term because it may have the features of
more than one type (e.g., an open transverse fracture).
like swimming, in which the body is less likely to experience collisions or compressive forces, are recommended.
Braces to support legs, ankles, knees, and wrists are used as needed. Canes, walkers, or wheelchairs can also
help compensate for weaknesses.
When bones do break, casts, splints, or wraps are used. In some cases, metal rods may be surgically implanted
into the long bones of the arms and legs. Research is currently being conducted on using bisphosphonates to
treat OI. Smoking and being overweight are especially risky in people with OI, since smoking is known to
weaken bones, and extra body weight puts additional stress on the bones.
212
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 6.20
Types of Fractures
Compare healthy bone with different types of fractures: (a) closed fracture, (b) open fracture, (c)
transverse fracture, (d) spiral fracture, (e) comminuted fracture, (f) impacted fracture, (g) greenstick fracture, and (h) oblique fracture.
6.5 • Fractures: Bone Repair
213
Types of Fractures
Type of fracture
Description
Transverse
Occurs straight across the long axis of the bone
Oblique
Occurs at an angle that is not 90 degrees
Spiral
Bone segments are pulled apart as a result of a twisting motion
Comminuted
Several breaks result in many small pieces between two large segments
Impacted
One fragment is driven into the other, usually as a result of compression
Greenstick
A partial fracture in which only one side of the bone is broken
Open (or
compound)
A fracture in which at least one end of the broken bone tears through the skin; carries a high
risk of infection
Closed (or
simple)
A fracture in which the skin remains intact
TABLE 6.4
Bone Repair
When a bone breaks, blood flows from any vessel torn by the fracture. These vessels could be in the periosteum,
osteons, and/or medullary cavity. The blood begins to clot, and about six to eight hours after the fracture, the
clotting blood has formed a fracture hematoma (Figure 6.21a). The disruption of blood flow to the bone results in
the death of bone cells around the fracture.
FIGURE 6.21
Stages in Fracture Repair
The healing of a bone fracture follows a series of progressive steps: (a) A fracture hematoma
forms. (b) Internal and external calli form. (c) Cartilage of the calli is replaced by trabecular bone. (d) Remodeling occurs.
Within about 48 hours after the fracture, chondrocytes from the endosteum have created an internal callus (plural
= calli) by secreting a fibrocartilaginous matrix between the two ends of the broken bone, while the periosteal
chondrocytes and osteoblasts create an external callus of hyaline cartilage and bone, respectively, around the
outside of the break (Figure 6.21b). This stabilizes the fracture.
Over the next several weeks, osteoclasts resorb the dead bone; osteogenic cells become active, divide, and
differentiate into osteoblasts. The cartilage in the calli is replaced by trabecular bone via endochondral ossification
(Figure 6.21c).
Eventually, the internal and external calli unite, compact bone replaces spongy bone at the outer margins of the
214
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
fracture, and healing is complete. A slight swelling may remain on the outer surface of the bone, but quite often, that
region undergoes remodeling (Figure 6.21d), and no external evidence of the fracture remains.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/fracturequiz) to review different types of fractures and then take a short
self-assessment quiz.
6.6 Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the effect exercise has on bone tissue
•
List the nutrients that affect bone health
•
Discuss the role those nutrients play in bone health
•
Describe the effects of hormones on bone tissue
All of the organ systems of your body are interdependent, and the skeletal system is no exception. The food you take
in via your digestive system and the hormones secreted by your endocrine system affect your bones. Even using
your muscles to engage in exercise has an impact on your bones.
Exercise and Bone Tissue
During long space missions, astronauts can lose approximately 1 to 2 percent of their bone mass per month. This
loss of bone mass is thought to be caused by the lack of mechanical stress on astronauts’ bones due to the low
gravitational forces in space. Lack of mechanical stress causes bones to lose mineral salts and collagen fibers, and
thus strength. Similarly, mechanical stress stimulates the deposition of mineral salts and collagen fibers. The
internal and external structure of a bone will change as stress increases or decreases so that the bone is an ideal
size and weight for the amount of activity it endures. That is why people who exercise regularly have thicker bones
than people who are more sedentary. It is also why a broken bone in a cast atrophies while its contralateral mate
maintains its concentration of mineral salts and collagen fibers. The bones undergo remodeling as a result of forces
(or lack of forces) placed on them.
Numerous, controlled studies have demonstrated that people who exercise regularly have greater bone density than
those who are more sedentary. Any type of exercise will stimulate the deposition of more bone tissue, but resistance
training has a greater effect than cardiovascular activities. Resistance training is especially important to slow down
the eventual bone loss due to aging and for preventing osteoporosis.
Nutrition and Bone Tissue
The vitamins and minerals contained in all of the food we consume are important for all of our organ systems.
However, there are certain nutrients that affect bone health.
Calcium and Vitamin D
You already know that calcium is a critical component of bone, especially in the form of calcium phosphate and
calcium carbonate. Since the body cannot make calcium, it must be obtained from the diet. However, calcium
cannot be absorbed from the small intestine without vitamin D. Therefore, intake of vitamin D is also critical to bone
health. In addition to vitamin D’s role in calcium absorption, it also plays a role, though not as clearly understood, in
bone remodeling.
Milk and other dairy foods are not the only sources of calcium. This important nutrient is also found in green leafy
vegetables, broccoli, and intact salmon and canned sardines with their soft bones. Nuts, beans, seeds, and shellfish
provide calcium in smaller quantities.
Except for fatty fish like salmon and tuna, or fortified milk or cereal, vitamin D is not found naturally in many foods.
The action of sunlight on the skin triggers the body to produce its own vitamin D (Figure 6.22), but many people,
especially those of darker complexion and those living in northern latitudes where the sun’s rays are not as strong,
are deficient in vitamin D. In cases of deficiency, a doctor can prescribe a vitamin D supplement.
6.6 • Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone Tissue
215
FIGURE 6.22
Synthesis of Vitamin D
Sunlight is one source of vitamin D.
Other Nutrients
Vitamin K also supports bone mineralization and may have a synergistic role with vitamin D in the regulation of bone
growth. Green leafy vegetables are a good source of vitamin K.
The minerals magnesium and fluoride may also play a role in supporting bone health. While magnesium is only
found in trace amounts in the human body, more than 60 percent of it is in the skeleton, suggesting it plays a role in
the structure of bone. Fluoride can displace the hydroxyl group in bone’s hydroxyapatite crystals and form
fluorapatite. Similar to its effect on dental enamel, fluorapatite helps stabilize and strengthen bone mineral. Fluoride
can also enter spaces within hydroxyapatite crystals, thus increasing their density.
Omega-3 fatty acids have long been known to reduce inflammation in various parts of the body. Inflammation can
interfere with the function of osteoblasts, so consuming omega-3 fatty acids, in the diet or in supplements, may also
help enhance production of new osseous tissue. Table 6.5 summarizes the role of nutrients in bone health.
216
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
Nutrients and Bone Health
Nutrient
Role in bone health
Calcium
Needed to make calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate, which form the hydroxyapatite
crystals that give bone its hardness
Vitamin D
Needed for calcium absorption
Vitamin K
Supports bone mineralization; may have synergistic effect with vitamin D
Magnesium
Structural component of bone
Fluoride
Structural component of bone
Omega-3 fatty
acids
Reduces inflammation that may interfere with osteoblast function
TABLE 6.5
Hormones and Bone Tissue
The endocrine system produces and secretes hormones, many of which interact with the skeletal system. These
hormones are involved in controlling bone growth, maintaining bone once it is formed, and remodeling it.
Hormones That Influence Osteoblasts and/or Maintain the Matrix
Several hormones are necessary for controlling bone growth and maintaining the bone matrix. The pituitary gland
secretes growth hormone (GH), which, as its name implies, controls bone growth in several ways. It triggers
chondrocyte proliferation in epiphyseal plates, resulting in the increasing length of long bones. GH also increases
calcium retention, which enhances mineralization, and stimulates osteoblastic activity, which improves bone
density.
GH is not alone in stimulating bone growth and maintaining osseous tissue. Thyroxine, a hormone secreted by the
thyroid gland promotes osteoblastic activity and the synthesis of bone matrix. During puberty, the sex hormones
(estrogen and testosterone) also come into play. They too promote osteoblastic activity and production of bone
matrix, and in addition, are responsible for the growth spurt that often occurs during adolescence. They also
promote the conversion of the epiphyseal plate to the epiphyseal line (i.e., cartilage to its bony remnant), thus
bringing an end to the longitudinal growth of bones. Additionally, calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D, is produced
by the kidneys and stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphate from the digestive tract.
Aging and the...
Skeletal System
Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by a decrease in bone mass that occurs when the rate of bone
resorption exceeds the rate of bone formation, a common occurrence as the body ages. Notice how this is
different from Paget’s disease. In Paget’s disease, new bone is formed in an attempt to keep up with the
resorption by the overactive osteoclasts, but that new bone is produced haphazardly. In fact, when a physician is
evaluating a patient with thinning bone, they will test for osteoporosis and Paget’s disease (as well as other
diseases). Osteoporosis does not have the elevated blood levels of alkaline phosphatase found in Paget’s
disease.
6.6 • Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone Tissue
217
Hormones That Influence Osteoclasts
Bone modeling and remodeling require osteoclasts to resorb unneeded, damaged, or old bone, and osteoblasts to
lay down new bone. Two hormones that affect the osteoclasts are parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcitonin.
PTH stimulates osteoclast proliferation and activity. As a result, calcium is released from the bones into the
circulation, thus increasing the calcium ion concentration in the blood. PTH also promotes the reabsorption of
calcium by the kidney tubules, which can affect calcium homeostasis (see below).
The small intestine is also affected by PTH, albeit indirectly. Because another function of PTH is to stimulate the
FIGURE 6.23
Graph Showing Relationship Between Age and Bone Mass
Bone density peaks at about 30 years of age. Females
lose bone mass more rapidly than males.
While osteoporosis can involve any bone, it most commonly affects the proximal ends of the femur, vertebrae,
and wrist. As a result of the loss of bone density, the osseous tissue may not provide adequate support for
everyday functions, and something as simple as a sneeze can cause a vertebral fracture. When an elderly person
falls and breaks a hip (really, the femur), it is very likely the femur that broke first, which resulted in the fall.
Histologically, osteoporosis is characterized by a reduction in the thickness of compact bone and the number
and size of trabeculae in cancellous bone.
Figure 6.23 shows that females lose bone mass more quickly than males starting at about 50 years of age. This
occurs because 50 is the approximate age at which females go through menopause. Not only do their menstrual
periods lessen and eventually cease, but their ovaries reduce in size and then cease the production of estrogen,
a hormone that promotes osteoblastic activity and production of bone matrix. Thus, osteoporosis is more
common in females, but males can develop it, too. Anyone with a family history of osteoporosis has a greater
risk of developing the disease, so the best treatment is prevention, which should start with a childhood diet that
includes adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D and a lifestyle that includes weight-bearing exercise. These
actions, as discussed above, are important in building bone mass. Promoting proper nutrition and weight-
bearing exercise early in life can maximize bone mass before the age of 30, thus reducing the risk of
osteoporosis.
For many elderly people, a hip fracture can be life threatening. The fracture itself may not be serious, but the
immobility that comes during the healing process can lead to the formation of blood clots that can lodge in the
capillaries of the lungs, resulting in respiratory failure; pneumonia due to the lack of poor air exchange that
accompanies immobility; pressure sores (bed sores) that allow pathogens to enter the body and cause
infections; and urinary tract infections from catheterization.
Current treatments for managing osteoporosis include bisphosphonates (the same medications often used in
Paget’s disease), calcitonin, and estrogen (for females only). Minimizing the risk of falls, for example, by
removing tripping hazards, is also an important step in managing the potential outcomes from the disease.
218
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
synthesis of vitamin D, and because vitamin D promotes intestinal absorption of calcium, PTH indirectly increases
calcium uptake by the small intestine. Calcitonin, a hormone secreted by the thyroid gland, has some effects that
counteract those of PTH. Calcitonin inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by the bones, thus
reducing the concentration of calcium ions in the blood. As evidenced by their opposing functions in maintaining
calcium homeostasis, PTH and calcitonin are generally not secreted at the same time. Table 6.6 summarizes the
hormones that influence the skeletal system.
Hormones That Affect the Skeletal System
Hormone
Role
Growth
hormone
Increases length of long bones, enhances mineralization, and improves bone density
Thyroxine
Stimulates bone growth and promotes synthesis of bone matrix
Sex
hormones
Promote osteoblastic activity and production of bone matrix; responsible for adolescent growth
spurt; promote conversion of epiphyseal plate to epiphyseal line
Calcitriol
Stimulates absorption of calcium and phosphate from digestive tract
Parathyroid
hormone
Stimulates osteoclast proliferation and resorption of bone by osteoclasts; promotes reabsorption
of calcium by kidney tubules; indirectly increases calcium absorption by small intestine
Calcitonin
Inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by bones
TABLE 6.6
6.7 Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of the Skeletal System and Other
Organ Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the effect of too much or too little calcium on the body
•
Explain the process of calcium homeostasis
Calcium is not only the most abundant mineral in bone, it is also the most abundant mineral in the human body.
Calcium ions are needed not only for bone mineralization but for tooth health, regulation of the heart rate and
strength of contraction, blood coagulation, contraction of smooth and skeletal muscle cells, and regulation of nerve
impulse conduction. The normal level of calcium in the blood is about 10 mg/dL. When the body cannot maintain
this level, a person will experience hypo- or hypercalcemia.
Hypocalcemia, a condition characterized by abnormally low levels of calcium, can have an adverse effect on a
number of different body systems including circulation, muscles, nerves, and bone. Without adequate calcium,
blood has difficulty coagulating, the heart may skip beats or stop beating altogether, muscles may have difficulty
contracting, nerves may have difficulty functioning, and bones may become brittle. The causes of hypocalcemia can
range from hormonal imbalances to an improper diet. Treatments vary according to the cause, but prognoses are
generally good.
Conversely, in hypercalcemia, a condition characterized by abnormally high levels of calcium, the nervous system is
underactive, which results in lethargy, sluggish reflexes, constipation and loss of appetite, confusion, and in severe
cases, coma.
Obviously, calcium homeostasis is critical. The skeletal, endocrine, and digestive systems play a role in this, but the
kidneys do, too. These body systems work together to maintain a normal calcium level in the blood (Figure 6.24).
6.7 • Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of the Skeletal System and Other Organ Systems
219
FIGURE 6.24
Pathways in Calcium Homeostasis
The body regulates calcium homeostasis with two pathways; one is signaled to turn
on when blood calcium levels drop below normal and one is the pathway that is signaled to turn on when blood calcium levels are elevated.
Calcium is a chemical element that cannot be produced by any biological processes. The only way it can enter the
body is through the diet. The bones act as a storage site for calcium: The body deposits calcium in the bones when
blood levels get too high, and it releases calcium when blood levels drop too low. This process is regulated by PTH,
vitamin D, and calcitonin.
Cells of the parathyroid gland have plasma membrane receptors for calcium. When calcium is not binding to these
receptors, the cells release PTH, which stimulates osteoclast proliferation and resorption of bone by osteoclasts.
This demineralization process releases calcium into the blood. PTH promotes reabsorption of calcium from the urine
by the kidneys, so that the calcium returns to the blood. Finally, PTH stimulates the synthesis of vitamin D, which in
turn, stimulates calcium absorption from any digested food in the small intestine.
When all these processes return blood calcium levels to normal, there is enough calcium to bind with the receptors
on the surface of the cells of the parathyroid glands, and this cycle of events is turned off (Figure 6.24).
When blood levels of calcium get too high, the thyroid gland is stimulated to release calcitonin (Figure 6.24), which
inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by the bones, but also decreases reabsorption of calcium
by the kidneys. All of these actions lower blood levels of calcium. When blood calcium levels return to normal, the
thyroid gland stops secreting calcitonin.
220
6 • Bone Tissue and the Skeletal System
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
articular cartilage
thin layer of cartilage covering an
epiphysis; reduces friction and acts as a shock
absorber
articulation
where two bone surfaces meet
bone
hard, dense connective tissue that forms the
structural elements of the skeleton
canaliculi
(singular = canaliculus) channels within the
bone matrix that house one of an osteocyte’s many
cytoplasmic extensions that it uses to communicate
and receive nutrients
cartilage
semi-rigid connective tissue found on the
skeleton in areas where flexibility and smooth
surfaces support movement
central canal
longitudinal channel in the center of
each osteon; contains blood vessels, nerves, and
lymphatic vessels; also known as the Haversian
canal
closed reduction
manual manipulation of a broken
bone to set it into its natural position without
surgery
compact bone
dense osseous tissue that can
withstand compressive forces
diaphysis
tubular shaft that runs between the
proximal and distal ends of a long bone
diploë
layer of spongy bone, that is sandwiched
between two the layers of compact bone found in
flat bones
endochondral ossification
process in which bone
forms by replacing hyaline cartilage
endosteum
delicate membranous lining of a bone’s
medullary cavity
epiphyseal line
completely ossified remnant of the
epiphyseal plate
epiphyseal plate
(also, growth plate) sheet of hyaline
cartilage in the metaphysis of an immature bone;
replaced by bone tissue as the organ grows in length
epiphysis
wide section at each end of a long bone;
filled with spongy bone and red marrow
external callus
collar of hyaline cartilage and bone
that forms around the outside of a fracture
flat bone
thin and curved bone; serves as a point of
attachment for muscles and protects internal
organs
fracture
broken bone
fracture hematoma
blood clot that forms at the site
of a broken bone
hematopoiesis
production of blood cells, which
occurs in the red marrow of the bones
hole
opening or depression in a bone
hypercalcemia
condition characterized by
abnormally high levels of calcium
hypocalcemia
condition characterized by abnormally
low levels of calcium
internal callus
fibrocartilaginous matrix, in the
endosteal region, between the two ends of a broken
bone
intramembranous ossification
process by which
bone forms directly from mesenchymal tissue
irregular bone
bone of complex shape; protects
internal organs from compressive forces
lacunae
(singular = lacuna) spaces in a bone that
house an osteocyte
long bone
cylinder-shaped bone that is longer than it
is wide; functions as a lever
medullary cavity
hollow region of the diaphysis;
filled with yellow marrow
modeling
process, during bone growth, by which
bone is resorbed on one surface of a bone and
deposited on another
nutrient foramen
small opening in the middle of the
external surface of the diaphysis, through which an
artery enters the bone to provide nourishment
open reduction
surgical exposure of a bone to reset a
fracture
orthopedist
doctor who specializes in diagnosing and
treating musculoskeletal disorders and injuries
osseous tissue
bone tissue; a hard, dense connective
tissue that forms the structural elements of the
skeleton
ossification
(also, osteogenesis) bone formation
ossification center
cluster of osteoblasts found in the
early stages of intramembranous ossification
osteoblast
cell responsible for forming new bone
osteoclast
cell responsible for resorbing bone
osteocyte
primary cell in mature bone; responsible
for maintaining the matrix
osteogenic cell
undifferentiated cell with high mitotic
activity; the only bone cells that divide; they
differentiate and develop into osteoblasts
osteoid
uncalcified bone matrix secreted by
osteoblasts
osteon
(also, Haversian system) basic structural unit
of compact bone; made of concentric layers of
calcified matrix
osteoporosis
disease characterized by a decrease in
bone mass; occurs when the rate of bone resorption
exceeds the rate of bone formation, a common
occurrence as the body ages
perforating canal
(also, Volkmann’s canal) channel
that branches off from the central canal and houses
vessels and nerves that extend to the periosteum
and endosteum
perichondrium
membrane that covers cartilage
periosteum
fibrous membrane covering the outer
6 • Key Terms
221
surface of bone and continuous with ligaments
primary ossification center
region, deep in the
periosteal collar, where bone development starts
during endochondral ossification
projection
bone markings where part of the surface
sticks out above the rest of the surface, where
tendons and ligaments attach
proliferative zone
region of the epiphyseal plate that
makes new chondrocytes to replace those that die
at the diaphyseal end of the plate and contributes to
longitudinal growth of the epiphyseal plate
red marrow
connective tissue in the interior cavity of
a bone where hematopoiesis takes place
remodeling
process by which osteoclasts resorb old
or damaged bone at the same time as and on the
same surface where osteoblasts form new bone to
replace that which is resorbed
reserve zone
region of the epiphyseal plate that
anchors the plate to the osseous tissue of the
epiphysis
secondary ossification center
region of bone
development in the epiphyses
sesamoid bone
small, round bone embedded in a
tendon; protects the tendon from compressive
forces
short bone
cube-shaped bone that is approximately
equal in length, width, and thickness; provides
limited motion
skeletal system
organ system composed of bones
and cartilage that provides for movement, support,
and protection
spongy bone
(also, cancellous bone) trabeculated
osseous tissue that supports shifts in weight
distribution
trabeculae
(singular = trabecula) spikes or sections
of the lattice-like matrix in spongy bone
yellow marrow
connective tissue in the interior cavity
of a bone where fat is stored
zone of calcified matrix
region of the epiphyseal
plate closest to the diaphyseal end; functions to
connect the epiphyseal plate to the diaphysis
zone of maturation and hypertrophy
region of the
epiphyseal plate where chondrocytes from the
proliferative zone grow and mature and contribute
to the longitudinal growth of the epiphyseal plate
Chapter Review
6.1 The Functions of the Skeletal System
The major functions of the bones are body support,
facilitation of movement, protection of internal organs,
storage of minerals and fat, and hematopoiesis.
Together, the muscular system and skeletal system are
known as the musculoskeletal system.
6.2 Bone Classification
Bones can be classified according to their shapes. Long
bones, such as the femur, are longer than they are
wide. Short bones, such as the carpals, are
approximately equal in length, width, and thickness.
Flat bones are thin, but are often curved, such as the
ribs. Irregular bones such as those of the face have no
characteristic shape. Sesamoid bones, such as the
patellae, are small and round, and are located in
tendons.
6.3 Bone Structure
A hollow medullary cavity filled with yellow marrow
runs the length of the diaphysis of a long bone. The
walls of the diaphysis are compact bone. The
epiphyses, which are wider sections at each end of a
long bone, are filled with spongy bone and red marrow.
The epiphyseal plate, a layer of hyaline cartilage, is
replaced by osseous tissue as the organ grows in
length. The medullary cavity has a delicate
membranous lining called the endosteum. The outer
surface of bone, except in regions covered with
articular cartilage, is covered with a fibrous membrane
called the periosteum. Flat bones consist of two layers
of compact bone surrounding a layer of spongy bone.
Bone markings depend on the function and location of
bones. Articulations are places where two bones meet.
Projections stick out from the surface of the bone and
provide attachment points for tendons and ligaments.
Holes are openings or depressions in the bones.
Bone matrix consists of collagen fibers and organic
ground substance, primarily hydroxyapatite formed
from calcium salts. Osteogenic cells develop into
osteoblasts. Osteoblasts are cells that make new bone.
They become osteocytes, the cells of mature bone,
when they get trapped in the matrix. Osteoclasts
engage in bone resorption. Compact bone is dense and
composed of osteons, while spongy bone is less dense
and made up of trabeculae. Blood vessels and nerves
enter the bone through the nutrient foramina to
nourish and innervate bones.
6.4 Bone Formation and Development
All bone formation is a replacement process. Embryos
develop a cartilaginous skeleton and various
membranes. During development, these are replaced
by bone during the ossification process. In
intramembranous ossification, bone develops directly
222
6 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
from sheets of mesenchymal connective tissue. In
endochondral ossification, bone develops by replacing
hyaline cartilage. Activity in the epiphyseal plate
enables bones to grow in length. Modeling allows
bones to grow in diameter. Remodeling occurs as bone
is resorbed and replaced by new bone. Osteogenesis
imperfecta is a genetic disease in which collagen
production is altered, resulting in fragile, brittle bones.
6.5 Fractures: Bone Repair
Fractured bones may be repaired by closed reduction
or open reduction. Fractures are classified by their
complexity, location, and other features. Common
types of fractures are transverse, oblique, spiral,
comminuted, impacted, greenstick, open (or
compound), and closed (or simple). Healing of
fractures begins with the formation of a hematoma,
followed by internal and external calli. Osteoclasts
resorb dead bone, while osteoblasts create new bone
that replaces the cartilage in the calli. The calli
eventually unite, remodeling occurs, and healing is
complete.
6.6 Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone
Tissue
Mechanical stress stimulates the deposition of mineral
salts and collagen fibers within bones. Calcium, the
predominant mineral in bone, cannot be absorbed from
the small intestine if vitamin D is lacking. Vitamin K
supports bone mineralization and may have a
synergistic role with vitamin D. Magnesium and
fluoride, as structural elements, play a supporting role
in bone health. Omega-3 fatty acids reduce
inflammation and may promote production of new
osseous tissue. Growth hormone increases the length
of long bones, enhances mineralization, and improves
bone density. Thyroxine stimulates bone growth and
promotes the synthesis of bone matrix. The sex
hormones (estrogen and testosterone) promote
osteoblastic activity and the production of bone matrix,
are responsible for the adolescent growth spurt, and
promote closure of the epiphyseal plates. Osteoporosis
is a disease characterized by decreased bone mass
that is common in aging adults. Calcitriol stimulates the
digestive tract to absorb calcium and phosphate.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulates osteoclast
proliferation and resorption of bone by osteoclasts.
Vitamin D plays a synergistic role with PTH in
stimulating the osteoclasts. Additional functions of
PTH include promoting reabsorption of calcium by
kidney tubules and indirectly increasing calcium
absorption from the small intestine. Calcitonin inhibits
osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by
bones.
6.7 Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of
the Skeletal System and Other Organ
Systems
Calcium homeostasis, i.e., maintaining a blood calcium
level of about 10 mg/dL, is critical for normal body
functions. Hypocalcemia can result in problems with
blood coagulation, muscle contraction, nerve
functioning, and bone strength. Hypercalcemia can
result in lethargy, sluggish reflexes, constipation and
loss of appetite, confusion, and coma. Calcium
homeostasis is controlled by PTH, vitamin D, and
calcitonin and the interactions of the skeletal,
endocrine, digestive, and urinary systems.
Review Questions
1. Which function of the skeletal system would be
especially important if you were in a car accident?
a.
storage of minerals
b.
protection of internal organs
c.
facilitation of movement
d.
fat storage
2. Bone tissue can be described as ________.
a.
dead calcified tissue
b.
cartilage
c.
the skeletal system
d.
dense, hard connective tissue
3. Without red marrow, bones would not be able to
________.
a.
store phosphate
b.
store calcium
c.
make blood cells
d.
move like levers
4. Yellow marrow has been identified as ________.
a.
an area of fat storage
b.
a point of attachment for muscles
c.
the hard portion of bone
d.
the cause of kyphosis
6 • Review Questions
223
5. Which of the following can be found in areas of
movement?
a.
hematopoiesis
b.
cartilage
c.
yellow marrow
d.
red marrow
6. The skeletal system is made of ________.
a.
muscles and tendons
b.
bones and cartilage
c.
vitreous humor
d.
minerals and fat
7. Most of the bones of the arms and hands are long
bones; however, the bones in the wrist are
categorized as ________.
a.
flat bones
b.
short bones
c.
sesamoid bones
d.
irregular bones
8. Sesamoid bones are found embedded in ________.
a.
joints
b.
muscles
c.
ligaments
d.
tendons
9. Bones that surround the spinal cord are classified
as ________ bones.
a.
irregular
b.
sesamoid
c.
flat
d.
short
10. Which category of bone is among the most
numerous in the skeleton?
a.
long bone
b.
sesamoid bone
c.
short bone
d.
flat bone
11. Long bones enable body movement by acting as a
________.
a.
counterweight
b.
resistive force
c.
lever
d.
fulcrum
12. Which of the following occurs in the spongy bone
of the epiphysis?
a.
bone growth
b.
bone remodeling
c.
hematopoiesis
d.
shock absorption
13. The diaphysis contains ________.
a.
the metaphysis
b.
fat stores
c.
spongy bone
d.
compact bone
14. The fibrous membrane covering the outer surface
of the bone is the ________.
a.
periosteum
b.
epiphysis
c.
endosteum
d.
diaphysis
15. Which of the following are incapable of undergoing
mitosis?
a.
osteoblasts and osteoclasts
b.
osteocytes and osteoclasts
c.
osteoblasts and osteocytes
d.
osteogenic cells and osteoclasts
16. Which cells do not originate from osteogenic cells?
a.
osteoblasts
b.
osteoclasts
c.
osteocytes
d.
osteoprogenitor cells
17. Which of the following are found in compact bone
and cancellous bone?
a.
Haversian systems
b.
Haversian canals
c.
lamellae
d.
lacunae
18. Which of the following are only found in cancellous
bone?
a.
canaliculi
b.
Volkmann’s canals
c.
trabeculae
d.
calcium salts
19. The area of a bone where the nutrient foramen
passes forms what kind of bone marking?
a.
a hole
b.
a facet
c.
a canal
d.
a fissure
20. Why is cartilage slow to heal?
a.
because it eventually develops into bone
b.
because it is semi-solid and flexible
c.
because it does not have a blood supply
d.
because endochondral ossification replaces
all cartilage with bone
224
6 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
21. Why are osteocytes spread out in bone tissue?
a.
They develop from mesenchymal cells.
b.
They are surrounded by osteoid.
c.
They travel through the capillaries.
d.
Formation of osteoid spreads out the
osteoblasts that formed the ossification
centers.
22. In endochondral ossification, what happens to the
chondrocytes?
a.
They develop into osteocytes.
b.
They die in the calcified matrix that surrounds
them and form the medullary cavity.
c.
They grow and form the periosteum.
d.
They group together to form the primary
ossification center.
23. Which of the following bones is (are) formed by
intramembranous ossification?
a.
the metatarsals
b.
the femur
c.
the ribs
d.
the flat bones of the cranium
24. Bones grow in length due to activity in the
________.
a.
epiphyseal plate
b.
perichondrium
c.
periosteum
d.
medullary cavity
25. Bones grow in diameter due to bone formation
________.
a.
in the medullary cavity
b.
beneath the periosteum
c.
in the epiphyseal plate
d.
within the metaphysis
26. Which of the following represents the correct
sequence of zones in the epiphyseal plate?
a.
proliferation, reserved, maturation,
calcification
b.
maturation, proliferation, reserved,
calcification
c.
calcification, maturation, proliferation,
reserved
d.
calcification, reserved, proliferation,
maturation
27. A fracture can be both ________.
a.
open and closed
b.
open and transverse
c.
transverse and greenstick
d.
greenstick and comminuted
28. How can a fractured diaphysis release fat globules
into the bloodstream?
a.
The bone pierces fat stores in the skin.
b.
The yellow marrow in the diaphysis is
exposed and damaged.
c.
The injury triggers the body to release fat
from healthy bones.
d.
The red marrow in the fractured bone
releases fat to heal the fracture.
29. In a compound fracture, ________.
a.
the break occurs at an angle to the bone
b.
the broken bone does not tear the skin
c.
one fragment of broken bone is compressed
into the other
d.
broken bone pierces the skin
30. The internal and external calli are replaced by
________.
a.
hyaline cartilage
b.
trabecular bone
c.
osteogenic cells
d.
osteoclasts
31. The first type of bone to form during fracture
repair is ________ bone.
a.
compact
b.
lamellar
c.
spongy
d.
dense
32. Wolff’s law, which describes the effect of
mechanical forces in bone modeling/remodeling,
would predict that ________
a.
a right-handed pitcher will have thicker bones
in his right arm compared to his left.
b.
a right-handed cyclist will have thicker bones
in her right leg compared to her left.
c.
a broken bone will heal thicker than it was
before the fracture.
d.
a bed-ridden patient will have thicker bones
than an athlete.
33. Calcium cannot be absorbed from the small
intestine if ________ is lacking.
a.
vitamin D
b.
vitamin K
c.
calcitonin
d.
fluoride
34. Which one of the following foods is best for bone
health?
a.
carrots
b.
liver
c.
leafy green vegetables
d.
oranges
6 • Review Questions
225
35. Which of the following hormones are responsible
for the adolescent growth spurt?
a.
estrogen and testosterone
b.
calcitonin and calcitriol
c.
growth hormone and parathyroid hormone
d.
thyroxine and progesterone
36. With respect to their direct effects on osseous
tissue, which pair of hormones has actions that
oppose each other?
a.
estrogen and testosterone
b.
calcitonin and calcitriol
c.
estrogen and progesterone
d.
calcitonin and parathyroid hormone
37. When calcium levels are too high or too low, which
body system is primarily affected?
a.
skeletal system
b.
endocrine system
c.
digestive system
d.
nervous system
38. All of the following play a role in calcium
homeostasis except
a.
thyroxine
b.
calcitonin
c.
parathyroid hormone
d.
vitamin D
39. Which of the following is most likely to be released
when blood calcium levels are elevated?
a.
thyroxine
b.
calcitonin
c.
parathyroid hormone
d.
vitamin D
Critical Thinking Questions
40. The skeletal system is composed of bone and
cartilage and has many functions. Choose three of
these functions and discuss what features of the
skeletal system allow it to accomplish these
functions.
41. What are the structural and functional differences
between a tarsal and a metatarsal?
42. What are the structural and functional differences
between the femur and the patella?
43. If the articular cartilage at the end of one of your
long bones were to degenerate, what symptoms
do you think you would experience? Why?
44. In what ways is the structural makeup of compact
and spongy bone well suited to their respective
functions?
45. In what ways do intramembranous and
endochondral ossification differ?
46. Considering how a long bone develops, what are
the similarities and differences between a primary
and a secondary ossification center?
47. What is the difference between closed reduction
and open reduction? In what type of fracture
would closed reduction most likely occur? In what
type of fracture would open reduction most likely
occur?
48. In terms of origin and composition, what are the
differences between an internal callus and an
external callus?
49. If you were a dietician who had a young female
patient with a family history of osteoporosis, what
foods would you suggest she include in her diet?
Why?
50. During the early years of space exploration our
astronauts, who had been floating in space, would
return to earth showing significant bone loss
dependent on how long they were in space.
Discuss how this might happen and what could be
done to alleviate this condition.
51. An individual with very low levels of vitamin D
presents themselves to you complaining of
seemingly fragile bones. Explain how these might
be connected.
52. Describe the effects caused when the parathyroid
gland fails to respond to calcium bound to its
receptors.
226
6 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 7
Axial Skeleton
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the functions of the skeletal system and define its two major subdivisions
•
Identify the bones and bony structures of the skull, the cranial suture lines, the cranial fossae, and the
openings in the skull
•
Discuss the vertebral column and regional variations in its bony components and curvatures
•
Describe the components of the thoracic cage
•
Discuss the embryonic development of the axial skeleton
The skeletal system forms the rigid internal framework of the body. It consists of the bones,
cartilages, and ligaments. Bones support the weight of the body, allow for body movements, and protect internal
organs. Cartilage provides flexible strength and support for body structures such as the thoracic cage, the external
ear, and the trachea and larynx. At joints of the body, cartilage can also unite adjacent bones or provide cushioning
between them. Ligaments are the strong connective tissue bands that hold the bones at a moveable joint together
and serve to prevent excessive movements of the joint that would result in injury. Providing movement of the
skeleton are the muscles of the body, which are firmly attached to the skeleton via connective tissue structures
called tendons. As muscles contract, they pull on the bones to produce movements of the body. Thus, without a
skeleton, you would not be able to stand, run, or even feed yourself!
Each bone of the body serves a particular function, and therefore bones vary in size, shape, and strength based on
these functions. For example, the bones of the lower back and lower limb are thick and strong to support your body
weight. Similarly, the size of a bony landmark that serves as a muscle attachment site on an individual bone is
related to the strength of this muscle. Muscles can apply very strong pulling forces to the bones of the skeleton. To
resist these forces, bones have enlarged bony landmarks at sites where powerful muscles attach. This means that
not only the size of a bone, but also its shape, is related to its function. For this reason, the identification of bony
landmarks is important during your study of the skeletal system.
Bones are also dynamic organs that can modify their strength and thickness in response to changes in muscle
strength or body weight. Thus, muscle attachment sites on bones will thicken if you begin a workout program that
increases muscle strength. Similarly, the walls of weight-bearing bones will thicken if you gain body weight or begin
pounding the pavement as part of a new running regimen. In contrast, a reduction in muscle strength or body weight
Figure 7.1
Lateral View of the Human Skull
will cause bones to become thinner. This may happen during a prolonged hospital stay, following limb
immobilization in a cast, or going into the weightlessness of outer space. Even a change in diet, such as eating only
soft food due to the loss of teeth, will result in a noticeable decrease in the size and thickness of the jaw bones.
7.1 Divisions of the Skeletal System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the functions of the skeletal system
•
Distinguish between the axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton
•
Define the axial skeleton and its components
•
Define the appendicular skeleton and its components
The skeletal system includes all of the bones, cartilages, and ligaments of the body that support and give shape to
the body and body structures. The skeleton consists of the bones of the body. For adults, there are 206 bones in the
skeleton. Younger individuals have higher numbers of bones because some bones fuse together during childhood
and adolescence to form an adult bone. The primary functions of the skeleton are to provide a rigid, internal
structure that can support the weight of the body against the force of gravity, and to provide a structure upon which
muscles can act to produce movements of the body. The lower portion of the skeleton is specialized for stability
during walking or running. In contrast, the upper skeleton has greater mobility and ranges of motion, features that
allow you to lift and carry objects or turn your head and trunk.
In addition to providing for support and movements of the body, the skeleton has protective and storage functions.
It protects the internal organs, including the brain, spinal cord, heart, lungs, and pelvic organs. The bones of the
skeleton serve as the primary storage site for important minerals such as calcium and phosphate. The bone marrow
found within bones stores fat and houses the blood-cell producing tissue of the body.
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular.
The Axial Skeleton
The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and appendicular. The axial skeleton forms the
vertical, central axis of the body and includes all bones of the head, neck, chest, and back (Figure 7.2). It serves to
protect the brain, spinal cord, heart, and lungs. It also serves as the attachment site for muscles that move the
head, neck, and back, and for muscles that act across the shoulder and hip joints to move their corresponding limbs.
The axial skeleton of the adult consists of 80 bones, including the skull, the vertebral column, and the thoracic
cage. The skull is formed by 22 bones. Also associated with the head are an additional seven bones, including the
hyoid bone and the ear ossicles (three small bones found in each middle ear). The vertebral column consists of 24
bones, each called a vertebra, plus the sacrum and coccyx. The thoracic cage includes the 12 pairs of ribs, and the
sternum, the flattened bone of the anterior chest.
228
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.2
Axial and Appendicular Skeleton
The axial skeleton supports the head, neck, back, and chest and thus forms the vertical
axis of the body. It consists of the skull, vertebral column (including the sacrum and coccyx), and the thoracic cage, formed by the ribs and
sternum. The appendicular skeleton is made up of all bones of the upper and lower limbs.
The Appendicular Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton includes all bones of the upper and lower limbs, plus the bones that attach each limb to
the axial skeleton. There are 126 bones in the appendicular skeleton of an adult. The bones of the appendicular
skeleton are covered in a separate chapter.
7.2 The Skull
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List and identify the bones of the brain case and face
•
Locate the major suture lines of the skull and name the bones associated with each
•
Locate and define the boundaries of the anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae, the temporal fossa, and
infratemporal fossa
•
Define the paranasal sinuses and identify the location of each
•
Name the bones that make up the walls of the orbit and identify the openings associated with the orbit
•
Identify the bones and structures that form the nasal septum and nasal conchae, and locate the hyoid bone
•
Identify the bony openings of the skull
The cranium (skull) is the skeletal structure of the head that supports the face and protects the brain. It is
subdivided into the facial bones and the brain case, or cranial vault (Figure 7.3). The facial bones underlie the facial
7.2 • The Skull
229
structures, form the nasal cavity, enclose the eyeballs, and support the teeth of the upper and lower jaws. The
rounded brain case surrounds and protects the brain and houses the middle and inner ear structures.
In the adult, the skull consists of 22 individual bones, 21 of which are immobile and united into a single unit. The
22nd bone is the mandible (lower jaw), which is the only moveable bone of the skull.
FIGURE 7.3
Parts of the Skull
The skull consists of the rounded brain case that houses the brain and the facial bones that form the
upper and lower jaws, nose, orbits, and other facial structures.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/skull1) to view a rotating and exploded skull, with color-coded bones. Which
bone (yellow) is centrally located and joins with most of the other bones of the skull?
Anterior View of Skull
The anterior skull consists of the facial bones and provides the bony support for the eyes and structures of the face.
This view of the skull is dominated by the openings of the orbits and the nasal cavity. Also seen are the upper and
lower jaws, with their respective teeth (Figure 7.4).
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and muscles that move the eyeball or open the upper eyelid.
The upper margin of the anterior orbit is the supraorbital margin. Located near the midpoint of the supraorbital
margin is a small opening called the supraorbital foramen. This provides for passage of a sensory nerve to the skin
of the forehead. Below the orbit is the infraorbital foramen, which is the point of emergence for a sensory nerve
that supplies the anterior face below the orbit.
230
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.4
Anterior View of Skull
An anterior view of the skull shows the bones that form the forehead, orbits (eye sockets), nasal
cavity, nasal septum, and upper and lower jaws.
Inside the nasal area of the skull, the nasal cavity is divided into halves by the nasal septum. The upper portion of
the nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone and the lower portion is the vomer
bone. Each side of the nasal cavity is triangular in shape, with a broad inferior space that narrows superiorly. When
looking into the nasal cavity from the front of the skull, two bony plates are seen projecting from each lateral wall.
The larger of these is the inferior nasal concha, an independent bone of the skull. Located just above the inferior
concha is the middle nasal concha, which is part of the ethmoid bone. A third bony plate, also part of the ethmoid
bone, is the superior nasal concha. It is much smaller and out of sight, above the middle concha. The superior nasal
concha is located just lateral to the perpendicular plate, in the upper nasal cavity.
Lateral View of Skull
A view of the lateral skull is dominated by the large, rounded brain case above and the upper and lower jaws with
their teeth below (Figure 7.5). Separating these areas is the bridge of bone called the zygomatic arch. The
zygomatic arch is the bony arch on the side of skull that spans from the area of the cheek to just above the ear
canal. It is formed by the junction of two bony processes: a short anterior component, the temporal process of the
zygomatic bone (the cheekbone) and a longer posterior portion, the zygomatic process of the temporal bone,
extending forward from the temporal bone. Thus the temporal process (anteriorly) and the zygomatic process
(posteriorly) join together, like the two ends of a drawbridge, to form the zygomatic arch. One of the major muscles
that pulls the mandible upward during biting and chewing arises from the zygomatic arch.
On the lateral side of the brain case, above the level of the zygomatic arch, is a shallow space called the temporal
fossa. Below the level of the zygomatic arch and deep to the vertical portion of the mandible is another space called
the infratemporal fossa. Both the temporal fossa and infratemporal fossa contain muscles that act on the mandible
during chewing.
7.2 • The Skull
231
FIGURE 7.5
Lateral View of Skull
The lateral skull shows the large rounded brain case, zygomatic arch, and the upper and lower jaws.
The zygomatic arch is formed jointly by the zygomatic process of the temporal bone and the temporal process of the zygomatic bone. The
shallow space above the zygomatic arch is the temporal fossa. The space inferior to the zygomatic arch and deep to the posterior mandible
is the infratemporal fossa.
Bones of the Brain Case
The brain case contains and protects the brain. The interior space that is almost completely occupied by the brain is
called the cranial cavity. This cavity is bounded superiorly by the rounded top of the skull, which is called the
calvaria (skullcap), and the lateral and posterior sides of the skull. The bones that form the top and sides of the
brain case are usually referred to as the “flat” bones of the skull.
The floor of the brain case is referred to as the base of the skull. This is a complex area that varies in depth and has
numerous openings for the passage of cranial nerves, blood vessels, and the spinal cord. Inside the skull, the base is
subdivided into three large spaces, called the anterior cranial fossa, middle cranial fossa, and posterior cranial
fossa (fossa = “trench or ditch”) (Figure 7.6). From anterior to posterior, the fossae increase in depth. The shape and
depth of each fossa corresponds to the shape and size of the brain region that each houses. The boundaries and
openings of the cranial fossae (singular = fossa) will be described in a later section.
232
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.6
Cranial Fossae
The bones of the brain case surround and protect the brain, which occupies the cranial cavity. The base of
the brain case, which forms the floor of cranial cavity, is subdivided into the shallow anterior cranial fossa, the middle cranial fossa, and the
deep posterior cranial fossa.
The brain case consists of eight bones. These include the paired parietal and temporal bones, plus the unpaired
frontal, occipital, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones.
Parietal Bone
The parietal bone forms most of the upper lateral side of the skull (see Figure 7.5). These are paired bones, with the
right and left parietal bones joining together at the top of the skull. Each parietal bone is also bounded anteriorly by
the frontal bone, inferiorly by the temporal bone, and posteriorly by the occipital bone.
Temporal Bone
The temporal bone forms the lower lateral side of the skull (see Figure 7.5). Common wisdom has it that the
temporal bone (temporal = “time”) is so named because this area of the head (the temple) is where hair typically
first turns gray, indicating the passage of time.
The temporal bone is subdivided into several regions (Figure 7.7). The flattened, upper portion is the squamous
portion of the temporal bone. Below this area and projecting anteriorly is the zygomatic process of the temporal
bone, which forms the posterior portion of the zygomatic arch. Posteriorly is the mastoid portion of the temporal
bone. Projecting inferiorly from this region is a large prominence, the mastoid process, which serves as a muscle
attachment site. The mastoid process can easily be felt on the side of the head just behind your earlobe. On the
interior of the skull, the petrous portion of each temporal bone forms the prominent, diagonally oriented petrous
ridge in the floor of the cranial cavity. Located inside each petrous ridge are small cavities that house the structures
of the middle and inner ears.
7.2 • The Skull
233
FIGURE 7.7
Temporal Bone
A lateral view of the isolated temporal bone shows the squamous, mastoid, and zygomatic portions of the
temporal bone.
Important landmarks of the temporal bone, as shown in Figure 7.8, include the following:
•
External acoustic meatus (ear canal)—This is the large opening on the lateral side of the skull that is associated
with the ear.
•
Internal acoustic meatus—This opening is located inside the cranial cavity, on the medial side of the petrous
ridge. It connects to the middle and inner ear cavities of the temporal bone.
•
Mandibular fossa—This is the deep, oval-shaped depression located on the external base of the skull, just in
front of the external acoustic meatus. The mandible (lower jaw) joins with the skull at this site as part of the
temporomandibular joint, which allows for movements of the mandible during opening and closing of the
mouth.
•
Articular tubercle—The smooth ridge located immediately anterior to the mandibular fossa. Both the articular
tubercle and mandibular fossa contribute to the temporomandibular joint, the joint that provides for
movements between the temporal bone of the skull and the mandible.
•
Styloid process—Posterior to the mandibular fossa on the external base of the skull is an elongated, downward
bony projection called the styloid process, so named because of its resemblance to a stylus (a pen or writing
tool). This structure serves as an attachment site for several small muscles and for a ligament that supports the
hyoid bone of the neck. (See also Figure 7.7.)
•
Stylomastoid foramen—This small opening is located between the styloid process and mastoid process. This is
the point of exit for the cranial nerve that supplies the facial muscles.
•
Carotid canal—The carotid canal is a zig-zag shaped tunnel that provides passage through the base of the skull
for one of the major arteries that supplies the brain. Its entrance is located on the outside base of the skull,
anteromedial to the styloid process. The canal then runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull, and
then turns upward to its exit in the floor of the middle cranial cavity, above the foramen lacerum.
234
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.8
External and Internal Views of Base of Skull
(a) The hard palate is formed anteriorly by the palatine processes of the
maxilla bones and posteriorly by the horizontal plate of the palatine bones. (b) The complex floor of the cranial cavity is formed by the
frontal, ethmoid, sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones. The lesser wing of the sphenoid bone separates the anterior and middle cranial
fossae. The petrous ridge (petrous portion of temporal bone) separates the middle and posterior cranial fossae.
Frontal Bone
The frontal bone is the single bone that forms the forehead. At its anterior midline, between the eyebrows, there is
a slight depression called the glabella (see Figure 7.5). The frontal bone also forms the supraorbital margin of the
orbit. Near the middle of this margin, is the supraorbital foramen, the opening that provides passage for a sensory
nerve to the forehead. The frontal bone is thickened just above each supraorbital margin, forming rounded brow
7.2 • The Skull
235
ridges. These are located just behind your eyebrows and vary in size among individuals, although they are generally
larger in males. Inside the cranial cavity, the frontal bone extends posteriorly. This flattened region forms both the
roof of the orbit below and the floor of the anterior cranial cavity above (see Figure 7.8b).
Occipital Bone
The occipital bone is the single bone that forms the posterior skull and posterior base of the cranial cavity (Figure
7.9; see also Figure 7.8). On its outside surface, at the posterior midline, is a small protrusion called the external
occipital protuberance, which serves as an attachment site for a ligament of the posterior neck. Lateral to either
side of this bump is a superior nuchal line (nuchal = “nape” or “posterior neck”). The nuchal lines represent the
most superior point at which muscles of the neck attach to the skull, with only the scalp covering the skull above
these lines. On the base of the skull, the occipital bone contains the large opening of the foramen magnum, which
allows for passage of the spinal cord as it exits the skull. On either side of the foramen magnum is an oval-shaped
occipital condyle. These condyles form joints with the first cervical vertebra and thus support the skull on top of the
vertebral column.
FIGURE 7.9
Posterior View of Skull
This view of the posterior skull shows attachment sites for muscles and joints that support the
skull.
Sphenoid Bone
The sphenoid bone is a single, complex bone of the central skull (Figure 7.10). It serves as a “keystone” bone,
because it joins with almost every other bone of the skull. The sphenoid forms much of the base of the central skull
(see Figure 7.8) and also extends laterally to contribute to the sides of the skull (see Figure 7.5). Inside the cranial
cavity, the right and left lesser wings of the sphenoid bone, which resemble the wings of a flying bird, form the lip
of a prominent ridge that marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae. The sella turcica
(“Turkish saddle”) is located at the midline of the middle cranial fossa. This bony region of the sphenoid bone is
named for its resemblance to the horse saddles used by the Ottoman Turks, with a high back and a tall front. The
rounded depression in the floor of the sella turcica is the hypophyseal (pituitary) fossa, which houses the pea-
sized pituitary (hypophyseal) gland. The greater wings of the sphenoid bone extend laterally to either side away
from the sella turcica, where they form the anterior floor of the middle cranial fossa. The greater wing is best seen
on the outside of the lateral skull, where it forms a rectangular area immediately anterior to the squamous portion of
the temporal bone.
On the inferior aspect of the skull, each half of the sphenoid bone forms two thin, vertically oriented bony plates.
These are the medial pterygoid plate and lateral pterygoid plate (pterygoid = “wing-shaped”). The right and left
medial pterygoid plates form the posterior, lateral walls of the nasal cavity. The somewhat larger lateral pterygoid
plates serve as attachment sites for chewing muscles that fill the infratemporal space and act on the mandible.
236
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.10
Sphenoid Bone
Shown in isolation in (a) superior and (b) posterior views, the sphenoid bone is a single midline bone that
forms the anterior walls and floor of the middle cranial fossa. It has a pair of lesser wings and a pair of greater wings. The sella turcica
surrounds the hypophyseal fossa. Projecting downward are the medial and lateral pterygoid plates. The sphenoid has multiple openings for
the passage of nerves and blood vessels, including the optic canal, superior orbital fissure, foramen rotundum, foramen ovale, and foramen
spinosum.
Ethmoid Bone
The ethmoid bone is a single, midline bone that forms the roof and lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity, the upper
portion of the nasal septum, and contributes to the medial wall of the orbit (Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.12). On the
interior of the skull, the ethmoid also forms a portion of the floor of the anterior cranial cavity (see Figure 7.8b).
Within the nasal cavity, the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone forms the upper portion of the nasal septum.
The ethmoid bone also forms the lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity. Extending from each lateral wall are the
superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha, which are thin, curved projections that extend into the nasal cavity
(Figure 7.13).
In the cranial cavity, the ethmoid bone forms a small area at the midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa.
This region also forms the narrow roof of the underlying nasal cavity. This portion of the ethmoid bone consists of
two parts, the crista galli and cribriform plates. The crista galli (“rooster’s comb or crest”) is a small upward bony
projection located at the midline. It functions as an anterior attachment point for one of the covering layers of the
brain. To either side of the crista galli is the cribriform plate (cribrum = “sieve”), a small, flattened area with
numerous small openings termed olfactory foramina. Small nerve branches from the olfactory areas of the nasal
cavity pass through these openings to enter the brain.
The lateral portions of the ethmoid bone are located between the orbit and upper nasal cavity, and thus form the
lateral nasal cavity wall and a portion of the medial orbit wall. Located inside this portion of the ethmoid bone are
several small, air-filled spaces that are part of the paranasal sinus system of the skull.
7.2 • The Skull
237
FIGURE 7.11
Sagittal Section of Skull
This midline view of the sagittally sectioned skull shows the nasal septum.
FIGURE 7.12
Ethmoid Bone
The unpaired ethmoid bone is located at the midline within the central skull. It has an upward projection,
the crista galli, and a downward projection, the perpendicular plate, which forms the upper nasal septum. The cribriform plates form both
the roof of the nasal cavity and a portion of the anterior cranial fossa floor. The lateral sides of the ethmoid bone form the lateral walls of the
upper nasal cavity, part of the medial orbit wall, and give rise to the superior and middle nasal conchae. The ethmoid bone also contains the
ethmoid air cells.
238
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.13
Lateral Wall of Nasal Cavity
The three nasal conchae are curved bones that project from the lateral walls of the nasal
cavity. The superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha are parts of the ethmoid bone. The inferior nasal concha is an independent bone
of the skull.
Sutures of the Skull
A suture is an immobile joint between adjacent bones of the skull. The narrow gap between the bones is filled with
dense, fibrous connective tissue that unites the bones. The long sutures located between the bones of the brain
case are not straight, but instead follow irregular, tightly twisting paths. These twisting lines serve to tightly interlock
the adjacent bones, thus adding strength to the skull for brain protection.
The two suture lines seen on the top of the skull are the coronal and sagittal sutures. The coronal suture runs from
side to side across the skull, within the coronal plane of section (see Figure 7.5). It joins the frontal bone to the right
and left parietal bones. The sagittal suture extends posteriorly from the coronal suture, running along the midline at
the top of the skull in the sagittal plane of section (see Figure 7.9). It unites the right and left parietal bones. On the
posterior skull, the sagittal suture terminates by joining the lambdoid suture. The lambdoid suture extends
downward and laterally to either side away from its junction with the sagittal suture. The lambdoid suture joins the
occipital bone to the right and left parietal and temporal bones. This suture is named for its upside-down "V" shape,
which resembles the capital letter version of the Greek letter lambda (Λ). The squamous suture is located on the
lateral skull. It unites the squamous portion of the temporal bone with the parietal bone (see Figure 7.5). At the
intersection of four bones is the pterion, a small, capital-H-shaped suture line region that unites the frontal bone,
parietal bone, squamous portion of the temporal bone, and greater wing of the sphenoid bone. It is the weakest part
of the skull. The pterion is located approximately two finger widths above the zygomatic arch and a thumb’s width
posterior to the upward portion of the zygomatic bone.
Disorders of the...
Skeletal System
Head and traumatic brain injuries are major causes of immediate death and disability, with bleeding and
infections as possible additional complications. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2010), approximately 30 percent of all injury-related deaths in the United States are caused by head injuries.
The majority of head injuries involve falls. They are most common among young children (ages 0–4 years),
adolescents (15–19 years), and the elderly (over 65 years). Additional causes vary, but prominent among these
are automobile and motorcycle accidents.
7.2 • The Skull
239
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/headblow) to see how a blow to the head may produce a contrecoup
(counterblow) fracture of the basilar portion of the occipital bone on the base of the skull. Why may a basilar
fracture be life threatening?
Facial Bones of the Skull
The facial bones of the skull form the upper and lower jaws, the nose, nasal cavity and nasal septum, and the orbit.
The facial bones include 14 bones, with six paired bones and two unpaired bones. The paired bones are the maxilla,
palatine, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal, and inferior nasal conchae bones. The unpaired bones are the vomer and
mandible bones. Although classified with the brain-case bones, the ethmoid bone also contributes to the nasal
septum and the walls of the nasal cavity and orbit.
Maxillary Bone
The maxillary bone, often referred to simply as the maxilla (plural = maxillae), is one of a pair that together form the
upper jaw, much of the hard palate, the medial floor of the orbit, and the lateral base of the nose (see Figure 7.4).
The curved, inferior margin of the maxillary bone that forms the upper jaw and contains the upper teeth is the
alveolar process of the maxilla (Figure 7.14). Each tooth is anchored into a deep socket called an alveolus. On the
anterior maxilla, just below the orbit, is the infraorbital foramen. This is the point of exit for a sensory nerve that
supplies the nose, upper lip, and anterior cheek. On the inferior skull, the palatine process from each maxillary
bone can be seen joining together at the midline to form the anterior three-quarters of the hard palate (see Figure
7.8a). The hard palate is the bony plate that forms the roof of the mouth and floor of the nasal cavity, separating the
oral and nasal cavities.
Strong blows to the brain-case portion of the skull can produce fractures. These may result in bleeding inside
the skull with subsequent injury to the brain. The most common is a linear skull fracture, in which fracture lines
radiate from the point of impact. Other fracture types include a comminuted fracture, in which the bone is
broken into several pieces at the point of impact, or a depressed fracture, in which the fractured bone is pushed
inward. In a contrecoup (counterblow) fracture, the bone at the point of impact is not broken, but instead a
fracture occurs on the opposite side of the skull. Fractures of the occipital bone at the base of the skull can
occur in this manner, producing a basilar fracture that can damage the artery that passes through the carotid
canal.
A blow to the lateral side of the head may fracture the bones of the pterion. The pterion is an important clinical
landmark because located immediately deep to it on the inside of the skull is a major branch of an artery that
supplies the skull and covering layers of the brain. A strong blow to this region can fracture the bones around the
pterion. If the underlying artery is damaged, bleeding can cause the formation of a hematoma (collection of
blood) between the brain and interior of the skull. As blood accumulates, it will put pressure on the brain.
Symptoms associated with a hematoma may not be apparent immediately following the injury, but if untreated,
blood accumulation will exert increasing pressure on the brain and can result in death within a few hours.
240
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.14
Maxillary Bone
The maxillary bone forms the upper jaw and supports the upper teeth. Each maxilla also forms the lateral
floor of each orbit and the majority of the hard palate.
Palatine Bone
The palatine bone is one of a pair of irregularly shaped bones that contribute small areas to the lateral walls of the
nasal cavity and the medial wall of each orbit. The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the horizontal plate.
The plates from the right and left palatine bones join together at the midline to form the posterior quarter of the
hard palate (see Figure 7.8a). Thus, the palatine bones are best seen in an inferior view of the skull and hard palate.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
During embryonic development, the right and left maxilla bones come together at the midline to form the upper jaw.
At the same time, the muscle and skin overlying these bones join together to form the upper lip. Inside the mouth,
the palatine processes of the maxilla bones, along with the horizontal plates of the right and left palatine bones, join
together to form the hard palate. If an error occurs in these developmental processes, a birth defect of cleft lip or
cleft palate may result.
Cleft lip is a common development defect that affects approximately 1:1000 births, most of which are male. This
defect involves a partial or complete failure of the right and left portions of the upper lip to fuse together, leaving a
cleft (gap).
A more severe developmental defect is cleft palate, which affects the hard palate. The hard palate is the bony
structure that separates the nasal cavity from the oral cavity. It is formed during embryonic development by the
midline fusion of the horizontal plates from the right and left palatine bones and the palatine processes of the
maxilla bones. Cleft palate affects approximately 1:2500 births and is more common in females. It results from a
failure of the two halves of the hard palate to completely come together and fuse at the midline, thus leaving a gap
between them. This gap allows for communication between the nasal and oral cavities. In severe cases, the bony
gap continues into the anterior upper jaw where the alveolar processes of the maxilla bones also do not properly
join together above the front teeth. If this occurs, a cleft lip will also be seen. Because of the communication
between the oral and nasal cavities, a cleft palate makes it very difficult for an infant to generate the suckling
needed for nursing, thus leaving the infant at risk for malnutrition. Surgical repair is required to correct cleft palate
defects.
7.2 • The Skull
241
Zygomatic Bone
The zygomatic bone is also known as the cheekbone. Each of the paired zygomatic bones forms much of the lateral
wall of the orbit and the lateral-inferior margins of the anterior orbital opening (see Figure 7.4). The short temporal
process of the zygomatic bone projects posteriorly, where it forms the anterior portion of the zygomatic arch (see
Figure 7.5).
Nasal Bone
The nasal bone is one of two small bones that articulate (join) with each other to form the bony base (bridge) of the
nose. They also support the cartilages that form the lateral walls of the nose (see Figure 7.11). These are the bones
that are damaged when the nose is broken.
Lacrimal Bone
Each lacrimal bone is a small, rectangular bone that forms the anterior, medial wall of the orbit (see Figure 7.4 and
Figure 7.5). The anterior portion of the lacrimal bone forms a shallow depression called the lacrimal fossa, and
extending inferiorly from this is the nasolacrimal canal. The lacrimal fluid (tears of the eye), which serves to
maintain the moist surface of the eye, drains at the medial corner of the eye into the nasolacrimal canal. This duct
then extends downward to open into the nasal cavity, behind the inferior nasal concha. In the nasal cavity, the
lacrimal fluid normally drains posteriorly, but with an increased flow of tears due to crying or eye irritation, some
fluid will also drain anteriorly, thus causing a runny nose.
Inferior Nasal Conchae
The right and left inferior nasal conchae form a curved bony plate that projects into the nasal cavity space from the
lower lateral wall (see Figure 7.13). The inferior concha is the largest of the nasal conchae and can easily be seen
when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity.
Vomer Bone
The unpaired vomer bone, often referred to simply as the vomer, is triangular-shaped and forms the posterior-
inferior part of the nasal septum (see Figure 7.11). The vomer is best seen when looking from behind into the
posterior openings of the nasal cavity (see Figure 7.8a). In this view, the vomer is seen to form the entire height of
the nasal septum. A much smaller portion of the vomer can also be seen when looking into the anterior opening of
the nasal cavity.
Mandible
The mandible forms the lower jaw and is the only moveable bone of the skull. At the time of birth, the mandible
consists of paired right and left bones, but these fuse together during the first year to form the single U-shaped
mandible of the adult skull. Each side of the mandible consists of a horizontal body and posteriorly, a vertically
oriented ramus of the mandible (ramus = “branch”). The outside margin of the mandible, where the body and
ramus come together is called the angle of the mandible (Figure 7.15).
The ramus on each side of the mandible has two upward-going bony projections. The more anterior projection is the
flattened coronoid process of the mandible, which provides attachment for one of the biting muscles. The posterior
projection is the condylar process of the mandible, which is topped by the oval-shaped condyle. The condyle of
the mandible articulates (joins) with the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone. Together
these articulations form the temporomandibular joint, which allows for opening and closing of the mouth (see Figure
7.5). The broad U-shaped curve located between the coronoid and condylar processes is the mandibular notch.
Important landmarks for the mandible include the following:
•
Alveolar process of the mandible—This is the upper border of the mandibular body and serves to anchor the
lower teeth.
•
Mental protuberance—The forward projection from the inferior margin of the anterior mandible that forms the
chin (mental = “chin”).
•
Mental foramen—The opening located on each side of the anterior-lateral mandible, which is the exit site for a
sensory nerve that supplies the chin.
•
Mylohyoid line—This bony ridge extends along the inner aspect of the mandibular body (see Figure 7.11). The
muscle that forms the floor of the oral cavity attaches to the mylohyoid lines on both sides of the mandible.
•
Mandibular foramen—This opening is located on the medial side of the ramus of the mandible. The opening
242
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
leads into a tunnel that runs down the length of the mandibular body. The sensory nerve and blood vessels that
supply the lower teeth enter the mandibular foramen and then follow this tunnel. Thus, to numb the lower teeth
prior to dental work, the dentist must inject anesthesia into the lateral wall of the oral cavity at a point prior to
where this sensory nerve enters the mandibular foramen.
•
Lingula—This small flap of bone is named for its shape (lingula = “little tongue”). It is located immediately next
to the mandibular foramen, on the medial side of the ramus. A ligament that anchors the mandible during
opening and closing of the mouth extends down from the base of the skull and attaches to the lingula.
FIGURE 7.15
Isolated Mandible
The mandible is the only moveable bone of the skull.
The Orbit
The orbit is the bony socket that houses the eyeball and contains the muscles that move the eyeball or open the
upper eyelid. Each orbit is cone-shaped, with a narrow posterior region that widens toward the large anterior
opening. To help protect the eye, the bony margins of the anterior opening are thickened and somewhat constricted.
The medial walls of the two orbits are parallel to each other but each lateral wall diverges away from the midline at a
45° angle. This divergence provides greater lateral peripheral vision.
The walls of each orbit include contributions from seven skull bones (Figure 7.16). The frontal bone forms the roof
and the zygomatic bone forms the lateral wall and lateral floor. The medial floor is primarily formed by the maxilla,
with a small contribution from the palatine bone. The ethmoid bone and lacrimal bone make up much of the medial
wall and the sphenoid bone forms the posterior orbit.
At the posterior apex of the orbit is the opening of the optic canal, which allows for passage of the optic nerve from
the retina to the brain. Lateral to this is the elongated and irregularly shaped superior orbital fissure, which provides
passage for the artery that supplies the eyeball, sensory nerves, and the nerves that supply the muscles involved in
eye movements.
7.2 • The Skull
243
FIGURE 7.16
Bones of the Orbit
Seven skull bones contribute to the walls of the orbit. Opening into the posterior orbit from the cranial
cavity are the optic canal and superior orbital fissure.
The Nasal Septum and Nasal Conchae
The nasal septum consists of both bone and cartilage components (Figure 7.17; see also Figure 7.11). The upper
portion of the septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone. The lower and posterior parts of the
septum are formed by the triangular-shaped vomer bone. In an anterior view of the skull, the perpendicular plate of
the ethmoid bone is easily seen inside the nasal opening as the upper nasal septum, but only a small portion of the
vomer is seen as the inferior septum. A better view of the vomer bone is seen when looking into the posterior nasal
cavity with an inferior view of the skull, where the vomer forms the full height of the nasal septum. The anterior
nasal septum is formed by the septal cartilage, a flexible plate that fills in the gap between the perpendicular plate
of the ethmoid and vomer bones. This cartilage also extends outward into the nose where it separates the right and
left nostrils. The septal cartilage is not found in the dry skull.
Attached to the lateral wall on each side of the nasal cavity are the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae
(singular = concha), which are named for their positions (see Figure 7.13). These are bony plates that curve
downward as they project into the space of the nasal cavity. They serve to swirl the incoming air, which helps to
warm and moisturize it before the air moves into the delicate air sacs of the lungs. This also allows mucus, secreted
by the tissue lining the nasal cavity, to trap incoming dust, pollen, bacteria, and viruses. The largest of the conchae is
the inferior nasal concha, which is an independent bone of the skull. The middle concha and the superior conchae,
which is the smallest, are both formed by the ethmoid bone. When looking into the anterior nasal opening of the
skull, only the inferior and middle conchae can be seen. The small superior nasal concha is well hidden above and
behind the middle concha.
244
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.17
Nasal Septum
The nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone and the vomer bone. The
septal cartilage fills the gap between these bones and extends into the nose.
Cranial Fossae
Inside the skull, the floor of the cranial cavity is subdivided into three cranial fossae (spaces), which increase in
depth from anterior to posterior (see Figure 7.6, Figure 7.8b, and Figure 7.11). Since the brain occupies these areas,
the shape of each conforms to the shape of the brain regions that it contains. Each cranial fossa has anterior and
posterior boundaries and is divided at the midline into right and left areas by a significant bony structure or opening.
Anterior Cranial Fossa
The anterior cranial fossa is the most anterior and the shallowest of the three cranial fossae. It overlies the orbits
and contains the frontal lobes of the brain. Anteriorly, the anterior fossa is bounded by the frontal bone, which also
forms the majority of the floor for this space. The lesser wings of the sphenoid bone form the prominent ledge that
marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae. Located in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa
at the midline is a portion of the ethmoid bone, consisting of the upward projecting crista galli and to either side of
this, the cribriform plates.
Middle Cranial Fossa
The middle cranial fossa is deeper and situated posterior to the anterior fossa. It extends from the lesser wings of
the sphenoid bone anteriorly, to the petrous ridges (petrous portion of the temporal bones) posteriorly. The large,
diagonally positioned petrous ridges give the middle cranial fossa a butterfly shape, making it narrow at the midline
and broad laterally. The temporal lobes of the brain occupy this fossa. The middle cranial fossa is divided at the
midline by the upward bony prominence of the sella turcica, a part of the sphenoid bone. The middle cranial fossa
has several openings for the passage of blood vessels and cranial nerves (see Figure 7.8).
Openings in the middle cranial fossa are as follows:
•
Optic canal—This opening is located at the anterior lateral corner of the sella turcica. It provides for passage of
the optic nerve into the orbit.
•
Superior orbital fissure—This large, irregular opening into the posterior orbit is located on the anterior wall of
the middle cranial fossa, lateral to the optic canal and under the projecting margin of the lesser wing of the
sphenoid bone. Nerves to the eyeball and associated muscles, and sensory nerves to the forehead pass through
this opening.
7.2 • The Skull
245
•
Foramen rotundum—This rounded opening (rotundum = “round”) is located in the floor of the middle cranial
fossa, just inferior to the superior orbital fissure. It is the exit point for a major sensory nerve that supplies the
cheek, nose, and upper teeth.
•
Foramen ovale of the middle cranial fossa—This large, oval-shaped opening in the floor of the middle cranial
fossa provides passage for a major sensory nerve to the lateral head, cheek, chin, and lower teeth.
•
Foramen spinosum—This small opening, located posterior-lateral to the foramen ovale, is the entry point for an
important artery that supplies the covering layers surrounding the brain. The branching pattern of this artery
forms readily visible grooves on the internal surface of the skull and these grooves can be traced back to their
origin at the foramen spinosum.
•
Carotid canal—This is the zig-zag passageway through which a major artery to the brain enters the skull. The
entrance to the carotid canal is located on the inferior aspect of the skull, anteromedial to the styloid process
(see Figure 7.8a). From here, the canal runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull. Just above the
foramen lacerum, the carotid canal opens into the middle cranial cavity, near the posterior-lateral base of the
sella turcica.
•
Foramen lacerum—This irregular opening is located in the base of the skull, immediately inferior to the exit of
the carotid canal. This opening is an artifact of the dry skull, because in life it is completely filled with cartilage.
All the openings of the skull that provide for passage of nerves or blood vessels have smooth margins; the word
lacerum (“ragged” or “torn”) tells us that this opening has ragged edges and thus nothing passes through it.
Posterior Cranial Fossa
The posterior cranial fossa is the most posterior and deepest portion of the cranial cavity. It contains the cerebellum
of the brain. The posterior fossa is bounded anteriorly by the petrous ridges, while the occipital bone forms the floor
and posterior wall. It is divided at the midline by the large foramen magnum (“great aperture”), the opening that
provides for passage of the spinal cord.
Located on the medial wall of the petrous ridge in the posterior cranial fossa is the internal acoustic meatus (see
Figure 7.11). This opening provides for passage of the nerve from the hearing and equilibrium organs of the inner
ear, and the nerve that supplies the muscles of the face. Located at the anterior-lateral margin of the foramen
magnum is the hypoglossal canal. These emerge on the inferior aspect of the skull at the base of the occipital
condyle and provide passage for an important nerve to the tongue.
Immediately inferior to the internal acoustic meatus is the large, irregularly shaped jugular foramen (see Figure
7.8a). Several cranial nerves from the brain exit the skull via this opening. It is also the exit point through the base of
the skull for all the venous return blood leaving the brain. The venous structures that carry blood inside the skull
form large, curved grooves on the inner walls of the posterior cranial fossa, which terminate at each jugular foramen.
Paranasal Sinuses
The paranasal sinuses are hollow, air-filled spaces located within certain bones of the skull (Figure 7.18). All of the
sinuses communicate with the nasal cavity (paranasal = “next to nasal cavity”) and are lined with nasal mucosa.
They serve to reduce bone mass and thus lighten the skull, and they also add resonance to the voice. This second
feature is most obvious when you have a cold or sinus congestion. These produce swelling of the mucosa and
excess mucus production, which can obstruct the narrow passageways between the sinuses and the nasal cavity,
causing your voice to sound different to yourself and others. This blockage can also allow the sinuses to fill with
fluid, with the resulting pressure producing pain and discomfort.
The paranasal sinuses are named for the skull bone that each occupies. The frontal sinus is located just above the
eyebrows, within the frontal bone (see Figure 7.17). This irregular space may be divided at the midline into bilateral
spaces, or these may be fused into a single sinus space. The frontal sinus is the most anterior of the paranasal
sinuses. The largest sinus is the maxillary sinus. These are paired and located within the right and left maxillary
bones, where they occupy the area just below the orbits. The maxillary sinuses are most commonly involved during
sinus infections. Because their connection to the nasal cavity is located high on their medial wall, they are difficult to
drain. The sphenoid sinus is a single, midline sinus. It is located within the body of the sphenoid bone, just anterior
and inferior to the sella turcica, thus making it the most posterior of the paranasal sinuses. The lateral aspects of the
ethmoid bone contain multiple small spaces separated by very thin bony walls. Each of these spaces is called an
ethmoid air cell. These are located on both sides of the ethmoid bone, between the upper nasal cavity and medial
246
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
orbit, just behind the superior nasal conchae.
FIGURE 7.18
Paranasal Sinuses
The paranasal sinuses are hollow, air-filled spaces named for the skull bone that each occupies. The
most anterior is the frontal sinus, located in the frontal bone above the eyebrows. The largest are the maxillary sinuses, located in the right
and left maxillary bones below the orbits. The most posterior is the sphenoid sinus, located in the body of the sphenoid bone, under the
sella turcica. The ethmoid air cells are multiple small spaces located in the right and left sides of the ethmoid bone, between the medial
wall of the orbit and lateral wall of the upper nasal cavity.
Hyoid Bone
The hyoid bone is an independent bone that does not contact any other bone and thus is not part of the skull (Figure
7.19). It is a small U-shaped bone located in the upper neck near the level of the inferior mandible, with the tips of
the “U” pointing posteriorly. The hyoid serves as the base for the tongue above, and is attached to the larynx below
and the pharynx posteriorly. The hyoid is held in position by a series of small muscles that attach to it either from
above or below. These muscles act to move the hyoid up/down or forward/back. Movements of the hyoid are
coordinated with movements of the tongue, larynx, and pharynx during swallowing and speaking.
7.2 • The Skull
247
FIGURE 7.19
Hyoid Bone
The hyoid bone is located in the upper neck and does not join with any other bone. It provides attachments
for muscles that act on the tongue, larynx, and pharynx.
7.3 The Vertebral Column
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe each region of the vertebral column and the number of bones in each region
•
Discuss the curves of the vertebral column and how these change after birth
•
Describe a typical vertebra and determine the distinguishing characteristics for vertebrae in each vertebral
region and features of the sacrum and the coccyx
•
Define the structure of an intervertebral disc
•
Determine the location of the ligaments that provide support for the vertebral column
The vertebral column is also known as the spinal column or spine (Figure 7.20). It consists of a sequence of
vertebrae (singular = vertebra), each of which is separated and united by an intervertebral disc. Together, the
vertebrae and intervertebral discs form the vertebral column. It is a flexible column that supports the head, neck,
and body and allows for their movements. It also protects the spinal cord, which passes down the back through
openings in the vertebrae.
248
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.20
Vertebral Column
The adult vertebral column consists of 24 vertebrae, plus the sacrum and coccyx. The vertebrae are
divided into three regions: cervical C1–C7 vertebrae, thoracic T1–T12 vertebrae, and lumbar L1–L5 vertebrae. The vertebral column is
curved, with two primary curvatures (thoracic and sacrococcygeal curves) and two secondary curvatures (cervical and lumbar curves).
Regions of the Vertebral Column
The vertebral column originally develops as a series of 33 vertebrae, but this number is eventually reduced to 24
vertebrae, plus the sacrum and coccyx. The vertebral column is subdivided into five regions, with the vertebrae in
each area named for that region and numbered in descending order. In the neck, there are seven cervical vertebrae,
each designated with the letter “C” followed by its number. Superiorly, the C1 vertebra articulates (forms a joint)
with the occipital condyles of the skull. Inferiorly, C1 articulates with the C2 vertebra, and so on. Below these are
the 12 thoracic vertebrae, designated T1–T12. The lower back contains the L1–L5 lumbar vertebrae. The single
sacrum, which is also part of the pelvis, is formed by the fusion of five sacral vertebrae. Similarly, the coccyx, or
tailbone, results from the fusion of four small coccygeal vertebrae. However, the sacral and coccygeal fusions do not
start until age 20 and are not completed until middle age.
An interesting anatomical fact is that almost all mammals have seven cervical vertebrae, regardless of body size.
This means that there are large variations in the size of cervical vertebrae, ranging from the very small cervical
vertebrae of a shrew to the greatly elongated vertebrae in the neck of a giraffe. In a full-grown giraffe, each cervical
vertebra is 11 inches tall.
Curvatures of the Vertebral Column
The adult vertebral column does not form a straight line, but instead has four curvatures along its length (see Figure
7.20). These curves increase the vertebral column’s strength, flexibility, and ability to absorb shock. When the load
on the spine is increased, by carrying a heavy backpack for example, the curvatures increase in depth (become more
curved) to accommodate the extra weight. They then spring back when the weight is removed. The four adult
curvatures are classified as either primary or secondary curvatures. Primary curves are retained from the original
fetal curvature, while secondary curvatures develop after birth.
7.3 • The Vertebral Column
249
During fetal development, the body is flexed anteriorly into the fetal position, giving the entire vertebral column a
single curvature that is concave anteriorly. In the adult, this fetal curvature is retained in two regions of the vertebral
column as the thoracic curve, which involves the thoracic vertebrae, and the sacrococcygeal curve, formed by the
sacrum and coccyx. Each of these is thus called a primary curve because they are retained from the original fetal
curvature of the vertebral column.
A secondary curve develops gradually after birth as the child learns to sit upright, stand, and walk. Secondary
curves are concave posteriorly, opposite in direction to the original fetal curvature. The cervical curve of the neck
region develops as the infant begins to hold their head upright when sitting. Later, as the child begins to stand and
then to walk, the lumbar curve of the lower back develops. In adults, the lumbar curve is generally deeper in
females.
Disorders associated with the curvature of the spine include kyphosis (an excessive posterior curvature of the
thoracic region), lordosis (an excessive anterior curvature of the lumbar region), and scoliosis (an abnormal, lateral
curvature, accompanied by twisting of the vertebral column).
Disorders of the...
Vertebral Column
Developmental anomalies, pathological changes, or obesity can enhance the normal vertebral column curves,
resulting in the development of abnormal or excessive curvatures (Figure 7.21). Kyphosis, also referred to as
humpback or hunchback, is an excessive posterior curvature of the thoracic region. This can develop when
osteoporosis causes weakening and erosion of the anterior portions of the upper thoracic vertebrae, resulting in
their gradual collapse (Figure 7.22). Lordosis, or swayback, is an excessive anterior curvature of the lumbar
region and is most commonly associated with obesity or late pregnancy. The accumulation of body weight in the
abdominal region results an anterior shift in the line of gravity that carries the weight of the body. This causes in
an anterior tilt of the pelvis and a pronounced enhancement of the lumbar curve.
Scoliosis is an abnormal, lateral curvature, accompanied by twisting of the vertebral column. Compensatory
curves may also develop in other areas of the vertebral column to help maintain the head positioned over the
feet. Scoliosis is the most common vertebral abnormality among girls. The cause is usually unknown, but it may
result from weakness of the back muscles, defects such as differential growth rates in the right and left sides of
the vertebral column, or differences in the length of the lower limbs. When present, scoliosis tends to get worse
during adolescent growth spurts. Although most individuals do not require treatment, a back brace may be
recommended for growing children. In extreme cases, surgery may be required.
Excessive vertebral curves can be identified while an individual stands in the anatomical position. Observe the
vertebral profile from the side and then from behind to check for kyphosis or lordosis. Then have the person
bend forward. If scoliosis is present, an individual will have difficulty in bending directly forward, and the right
and left sides of the back will not be level with each other in the bent position.
FIGURE 7.21
Abnormal Curvatures of the Vertebral Column
(a) Scoliosis is an abnormal lateral bending of the vertebral column.
(b) An excessive curvature of the upper thoracic vertebral column is called kyphosis. (c) Lordosis is an excessive curvature in the
250
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Osteoporosis is a common age-related bone disease in which bone density and strength is decreased. Watch this
video (http://openstax.org/l/osteoporosis) to get a better understanding of how thoracic vertebrae may become
weakened and may fracture due to this disease. How may vertebral osteoporosis contribute to kyphosis?
General Structure of a Vertebra
Within the different regions of the vertebral column, vertebrae vary in size and shape, but they all follow a similar
structural pattern. A typical vertebra will consist of a body, a vertebral arch, and seven processes (Figure 7.23).
The body is the anterior portion of each vertebra and is the part that supports the body weight. Because of this, the
vertebral bodies progressively increase in size and thickness going down the vertebral column. The bodies of
adjacent vertebrae are separated and strongly united by an intervertebral disc.
The vertebral arch forms the posterior portion of each vertebra. It consists of four parts, the right and left pedicles
and the right and left laminae. Each pedicle forms one of the lateral sides of the vertebral arch. The pedicles are
anchored to the posterior side of the vertebral body. Each lamina forms part of the posterior roof of the vertebral
arch. The large opening between the vertebral arch and body is the vertebral foramen, which contains the spinal
cord. In the intact vertebral column, the vertebral foramina of all of the vertebrae align to form the vertebral
(spinal) canal, which serves as the bony protection and passageway for the spinal cord down the back. When the
vertebrae are aligned together in the vertebral column, notches in the margins of the pedicles of adjacent vertebrae
together form an intervertebral foramen, the opening through which a spinal nerve exits from the vertebral column
(Figure 7.24).
Seven processes arise from the vertebral arch. Each paired transverse process projects laterally and arises from
the junction point between the pedicle and lamina. The single spinous process (vertebral spine) projects posteriorly
at the midline of the back. The vertebral spines can easily be felt as a series of bumps just under the skin down the
middle of the back. The transverse and spinous processes serve as important muscle attachment sites. A superior
articular process extends or faces upward, and an inferior articular process faces or projects downward on each
side of a vertebrae. The paired superior articular processes of one vertebra join with the corresponding paired
inferior articular processes from the next higher vertebra. These junctions form slightly moveable joints between the
adjacent vertebrae. The shape and orientation of the articular processes vary in different regions of the vertebral
column and play a major role in determining the type and range of motion available in each region.
lumbar region of the vertebral column.
FIGURE 7.22
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is an age-related disorder that causes the gradual loss of bone density and strength.
When the thoracic vertebrae are affected, there can be a gradual collapse of the vertebrae. This results in kyphosis, an excessive
curvature of the thoracic region.
7.3 • The Vertebral Column
251
FIGURE 7.23
Parts of a Typical Vertebra
A typical vertebra consists of a body and a vertebral arch. The arch is formed by the paired
pedicles and paired laminae. Arising from the vertebral arch are the transverse, spinous, superior articular, and inferior articular processes.
The vertebral foramen provides for passage of the spinal cord. Each spinal nerve exits through an intervertebral foramen, located between
adjacent vertebrae. Intervertebral discs unite the bodies of adjacent vertebrae.
FIGURE 7.24
Intervertebral Disc
The bodies of adjacent vertebrae are separated and united by an intervertebral disc, which provides
padding and allows for movements between adjacent vertebrae. The disc consists of a fibrous outer layer called the anulus fibrosus and a
gel-like center called the nucleus pulposus. The intervertebral foramen is the opening formed between adjacent vertebrae for the exit of a
spinal nerve.
Regional Modifications of Vertebrae
In addition to the general characteristics of a typical vertebra described above, vertebrae also display characteristic
size and structural features that vary between the different vertebral column regions. Thus, cervical vertebrae are
smaller than lumbar vertebrae due to differences in the proportion of body weight that each supports. Thoracic
vertebrae have sites for rib attachment, and the vertebrae that give rise to the sacrum and coccyx have fused
together into single bones.
Cervical Vertebrae
Typical cervical vertebrae, such as C4 or C5, have several characteristic features that differentiate them from
thoracic or lumbar vertebrae (Figure 7.25). Cervical vertebrae have a small body, reflecting the fact that they carry
the least amount of body weight. Cervical vertebrae usually have a bifid (Y-shaped) spinous process. The spinous
processes of the C3–C6 vertebrae are short, but the spine of C7 is much longer. You can find these vertebrae by
running your finger down the midline of the posterior neck until you encounter the prominent C7 spine located at the
base of the neck. The transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae are sharply curved (U-shaped) to allow for
passage of the cervical spinal nerves. Each transverse process also has an opening called the transverse foramen.
An important artery that supplies the brain ascends up the neck by passing through these openings. The superior
and inferior articular processes of the cervical vertebrae are flattened and largely face upward or downward,
respectively.
252
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
The first and second cervical vertebrae are further modified, giving each a distinctive appearance. The first cervical
(C1) vertebra is also called the atlas, because this is the vertebra that supports the skull on top of the vertebral
column (in Greek mythology, Atlas was the god who supported the heavens on his shoulders). The C1 vertebra does
not have a body or spinous process. Instead, it is ring-shaped, consisting of an anterior arch and a posterior arch.
The transverse processes of the atlas are longer and extend more laterally than do the transverse processes of any
other cervical vertebrae. The superior articular processes face upward and are deeply curved for articulation with
the occipital condyles on the base of the skull. The inferior articular processes are flat and face downward to join
with the superior articular processes of the C2 vertebra.
The second cervical (C2) vertebra is called the axis, because it serves as the axis for rotation when turning the head
toward the right or left. The axis resembles typical cervical vertebrae in most respects, but is easily distinguished by
the dens (odontoid process), a bony projection that extends upward from the vertebral body. The dens joins with the
inner aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas, where it is held in place by the transverse ligament.
FIGURE 7.25
Cervical Vertebrae
A typical cervical vertebra has a small body, a bifid spinous process, transverse processes that have a
transverse foramen and are curved for spinal nerve passage. The atlas (C1 vertebra) does not have a body or spinous process. It consists of
an anterior and a posterior arch and elongated transverse processes. The axis (C2 vertebra) has the upward projecting dens, which
articulates with the anterior arch of the atlas.
7.3 • The Vertebral Column
253
Thoracic Vertebrae
The bodies of the thoracic vertebrae are larger than those of cervical vertebrae (Figure 7.26). The characteristic
feature for a typical midthoracic vertebra is the spinous process, which is long and has a pronounced downward
angle that causes it to overlap the next inferior vertebra. The superior articular processes of thoracic vertebrae face
anteriorly and the inferior processes face posteriorly. These orientations are important determinants for the type
and range of movements available to the thoracic region of the vertebral column.
Thoracic vertebrae have several additional articulation sites, each of which is called a facet, where a rib is attached.
Most thoracic vertebrae have two facets located on the lateral sides of the body, each of which is called a costal
facet (costal = “rib”). These are for articulation with the head (end) of a rib. An additional facet is located on the
transverse process for articulation with the tubercle of a rib.
FIGURE 7.26
Thoracic Vertebrae
A typical thoracic vertebra is distinguished by the spinous process, which is long and projects
downward to overlap the next inferior vertebra. It also has articulation sites (facets) on the vertebral body and a transverse process for rib
attachment.
FIGURE 7.27
Rib Articulation in Thoracic Vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae have superior and inferior articular facets on the vertebral
body for articulation with the head of a rib, and a transverse process facet for articulation with the rib tubercle.
254
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
Lumbar Vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae carry the greatest amount of body weight and are thus characterized by the large size and
thickness of the vertebral body (Figure 7.28). They have short transverse processes and a short, blunt spinous
process that projects posteriorly. The articular processes are large, with the superior process facing backward and
the inferior facing forward.
FIGURE 7.28
Lumbar Vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae are characterized by having a large, thick body and a short, rounded spinous
process.
Sacrum and Coccyx
The sacrum is a triangular-shaped bone that is thick and wide across its superior base where it is weight bearing and
then tapers down to an inferior, non-weight bearing apex (Figure 7.29). It is formed by the fusion of five sacral
vertebrae, a process that does not begin until after the age of 20. On the anterior surface of the older adult sacrum,
the lines of vertebral fusion can be seen as four transverse ridges. On the posterior surface, running down the
midline, is the median sacral crest, a bumpy ridge that is the remnant of the fused spinous processes (median =
“midline”; while medial = “toward, but not necessarily at, the midline”). Similarly, the fused transverse processes of
the sacral vertebrae form the lateral sacral crest.
The sacral promontory is the anterior lip of the superior base of the sacrum. Lateral to this is the roughened
auricular surface, which joins with the ilium portion of the hipbone to form the immobile sacroiliac joints of the
pelvis. Passing inferiorly through the sacrum is a bony tunnel called the sacral canal, which terminates at the sacral
hiatus near the inferior tip of the sacrum. The anterior and posterior surfaces of the sacrum have a series of paired
openings called sacral foramina (singular = foramen) that connect to the sacral canal. Each of these openings is
called a posterior (dorsal) sacral foramen or anterior (ventral) sacral foramen. These openings allow for the
anterior and posterior branches of the sacral spinal nerves to exit the sacrum. The superior articular process of the
sacrum, one of which is found on either side of the superior opening of the sacral canal, articulates with the inferior
articular processes from the L5 vertebra.
The coccyx, or tailbone, is derived from the fusion of four very small coccygeal vertebrae (see Figure 7.29). It
articulates with the inferior tip of the sacrum. It is not weight bearing in the standing position, but may receive some
body weight when sitting.
7.3 • The Vertebral Column
255
FIGURE 7.29
Sacrum and Coccyx
The sacrum is formed from the fusion of five sacral vertebrae, whose lines of fusion are indicated by
the transverse ridges. The fused spinous processes form the median sacral crest, while the lateral sacral crest arises from the fused
transverse processes. The coccyx is formed by the fusion of four small coccygeal vertebrae.
Intervertebral Discs and Ligaments of the Vertebral Column
The bodies of adjacent vertebrae are strongly anchored to each other by an intervertebral disc. This structure
provides padding between the bones during weight bearing, and because it can change shape, also allows for
movement between the vertebrae. Although the total amount of movement available between any two adjacent
vertebrae is small, when these movements are summed together along the entire length of the vertebral column,
large body movements can be produced. Ligaments that extend along the length of the vertebral column also
contribute to its overall support and stability.
Intervertebral Disc
An intervertebral disc is a fibrocartilaginous pad that fills the gap between adjacent vertebral bodies (see Figure
7.24). Each disc is anchored to the bodies of its adjacent vertebrae, thus strongly uniting these. The discs also
provide padding between vertebrae during weight bearing. Because of this, intervertebral discs are thin in the
cervical region and thickest in the lumbar region, which carries the most body weight. In total, the intervertebral
discs account for approximately 25 percent of your body height between the top of the pelvis and the base of the
skull. Intervertebral discs are also flexible and can change shape to allow for movements of the vertebral column.
Each intervertebral disc consists of two parts. The anulus fibrosus is the tough, fibrous outer layer of the disc. It
forms a circle (anulus = “ring” or “circle”) and is firmly anchored to the outer margins of the adjacent vertebral
bodies. Inside is the nucleus pulposus, consisting of a softer, more gel-like material. It has a high water content
that serves to resist compression and thus is important for weight bearing. With increasing age, the water content of
the nucleus pulposus gradually declines. This causes the disc to become thinner, decreasing total body height
somewhat, and reduces the flexibility and range of motion of the disc, making bending more difficult.
The gel-like nature of the nucleus pulposus also allows the intervertebral disc to change shape as one vertebra
rocks side to side or forward and back in relation to its neighbors during movements of the vertebral column. Thus,
bending forward causes compression of the anterior portion of the disc but expansion of the posterior disc. If the
posterior anulus fibrosus is weakened due to injury or increasing age, the pressure exerted on the disc when
bending forward and lifting a heavy object can cause the nucleus pulposus to protrude posteriorly through the
anulus fibrosus, resulting in a herniated disc (“ruptured” or “slipped” disc) (Figure 7.30). The posterior bulging of
the nucleus pulposus can cause compression of a spinal nerve at the point where it exits through the intervertebral
foramen, with resulting pain and/or muscle weakness in those body regions supplied by that nerve. The most
common sites for disc herniation are the L4/L5 or L5/S1 intervertebral discs, which can cause sciatica, a widespread
pain that radiates from the lower back down the thigh and into the leg. Similar injuries of the C5/C6 or C6/C7
intervertebral discs, following forcible hyperflexion of the neck from a collision accident or football injury, can
produce pain in the neck, shoulder, and upper limb.
256
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 7.30
Herniated Intervertebral Disc
Weakening of the anulus fibrosus can result in herniation (protrusion) of the nucleus
pulposus and compression of a spinal nerve, resulting in pain and/or muscle weakness in the body regions supplied by that nerve.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/herndisc1) to learn about a herniated disc. Watch this second video
(http://openstax.org/l/herndisc2) to see one possible treatment for a herniated disc, removing the damaged portion
of the disc. How could lifting a heavy object produce pain in a lower limb?
Ligaments of the Vertebral Column
Adjacent vertebrae are united by ligaments that run the length of the vertebral column along both its posterior and
anterior aspects (Figure 7.31). These serve to resist excess forward or backward bending movements of the
vertebral column, respectively.
The anterior longitudinal ligament runs down the anterior side of the entire vertebral column, uniting the vertebral
bodies. It serves to resist excess backward bending of the vertebral column. Protection against this movement is
particularly important in the neck, where extreme posterior bending of the head and neck can stretch or tear this
ligament, resulting in a painful whiplash injury. Prior to the mandatory installation of seat headrests, whiplash
injuries were common for passengers involved in a rear-end automobile collision.
The supraspinous ligament is located on the posterior side of the vertebral column, where it interconnects the
spinous processes of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. This strong ligament supports the vertebral column during
forward bending motions. In the posterior neck, where the cervical spinous processes are short, the supraspinous
ligament expands to become the nuchal ligament (nuchae = “nape” or “back of the neck”). The nuchal ligament is
attached to the cervical spinous processes and extends upward and posteriorly to attach to the midline base of the
skull, out to the external occipital protuberance. It supports the skull and prevents it from falling forward. This
ligament is much larger and stronger in four-legged animals such as cows, where the large skull hangs off the front
end of the vertebral column. You can easily feel this ligament by first extending your head backward and pressing
down on the posterior midline of your neck. Then tilt your head forward and you will fill the nuchal ligament popping
out as it tightens to limit anterior bending of the head and neck.
Additional ligaments are located inside the vertebral canal, next to the spinal cord, along the length of the vertebral
column. The posterior longitudinal ligament is found anterior to the spinal cord, where it is attached to the
posterior sides of the vertebral bodies. Posterior to the spinal cord is the ligamentum flavum (“yellow ligament”).
This consists of a series of short, paired ligaments, each of which interconnects the lamina regions of adjacent
vertebrae. The ligamentum flavum has large numbers of elastic fibers, which have a yellowish color, allowing it to
stretch and then pull back. Both of these ligaments provide important support for the vertebral column when
bending forward.
7.3 • The Vertebral Column
257
FIGURE 7.31
Ligaments of Vertebral Column
The anterior longitudinal ligament runs the length of the vertebral column, uniting the
anterior sides of the vertebral bodies. The supraspinous ligament connects the spinous processes of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. In
the posterior neck, the supraspinous ligament enlarges to form the nuchal ligament, which attaches to the cervical spinous processes and
to the base of the skull.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Use this tool (http://openstax.org/l/vertcolumn) to identify the bones, intervertebral discs, and ligaments of the
vertebral column. The thickest portions of the anterior longitudinal ligament and the supraspinous ligament are
found in which regions of the vertebral column?
CAREER CONNECTION
Chiropractor
Chiropractors are health professionals who use nonsurgical techniques to help patients with musculoskeletal
system problems that involve the bones, muscles, ligaments, tendons, or nervous system. They treat problems such
as neck pain, back pain, joint pain, or headaches. Chiropractors focus on the patient’s overall health and can also
provide counseling related to lifestyle issues, such as diet, exercise, or sleep problems. If needed, they will refer the
patient to other medical specialists.
Chiropractors use a drug-free, hands-on approach for patient diagnosis and treatment. They will perform a physical
exam, assess the patient’s posture and spine, and may perform additional diagnostic tests, including taking X-ray
images. They primarily use manual techniques, such as spinal manipulation, to adjust the patient’s spine or other
joints. They can recommend therapeutic or rehabilitative exercises, and some also include acupuncture, massage
therapy, or ultrasound as part of the treatment program. In addition to those in general practice, some chiropractors
specialize in sport injuries, neurology, orthopaedics, pediatrics, nutrition, internal disorders, or diagnostic imaging.
To become a chiropractor, students must have 3–4 years of undergraduate education, attend an accredited, four-
year Doctor of Chiropractic (D.C.) degree program, and pass a licensure examination to be licensed for practice in
their state. With the aging of the baby-boom generation, employment for chiropractors is expected to increase.
258
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
7.4 The Thoracic Cage
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the components that make up the thoracic cage
•
Identify the parts of the sternum and define the sternal angle
•
Discuss the parts of a rib and rib classifications
The thoracic cage (rib cage) forms the thorax (chest) portion of the body. It consists of the 12 pairs of ribs with their
costal cartilages and the sternum (Figure 7.32). The ribs are anchored posteriorly to the 12 thoracic vertebrae
(T1–T12). The thoracic cage protects the heart and lungs.
FIGURE 7.32
Thoracic Cage
The thoracic cage is formed by the (a) sternum and (b) 12 pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages. The ribs
are anchored posteriorly to the 12 thoracic vertebrae. The sternum consists of the manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The ribs are
classified as true ribs (1–7) and false ribs (8–12). The last two pairs of false ribs are also known as floating ribs (11–12).
Sternum
The sternum is the elongated bony structure that anchors the anterior thoracic cage. It consists of three parts: the
manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The manubrium is the wider, superior portion of the sternum. The top of the
manubrium has a shallow, U-shaped border called the jugular (suprasternal) notch. This can be easily felt at the
anterior base of the neck, between the medial ends of the clavicles. The clavicular notch is the shallow depression
located on either side at the superior-lateral margins of the manubrium. This is the site of the sternoclavicular joint,
between the sternum and clavicle. The first ribs also attach to the manubrium.
The elongated, central portion of the sternum is the body. The manubrium and body join together at the sternal
angle, so called because the junction between these two components is not flat, but forms a slight bend. The
second rib attaches to the sternum at the sternal angle. Since the first rib is hidden behind the clavicle, the second
rib is the highest rib that can be identified by palpation. Thus, the sternal angle and second rib are important
landmarks for the identification and counting of the lower ribs. Ribs 3–7 attach to the sternal body.
The inferior tip of the sternum is the xiphoid process. This small structure is cartilaginous early in life, but gradually
becomes ossified starting during middle age.
Ribs
Each rib is a curved, flattened bone that contributes to the wall of the thorax. The ribs articulate posteriorly with the
T1–T12 thoracic vertebrae, and most attach anteriorly via their costal cartilages to the sternum. There are 12 pairs
7.4 • The Thoracic Cage
259
of ribs. The ribs are numbered 1–12 in accordance with the thoracic vertebrae.
Parts of a Typical Rib
The posterior end of a typical rib is called the head of the rib (see Figure 7.27). This region articulates primarily with
the costal facet located on the body of the same numbered thoracic vertebra and to a lesser degree, with the costal
facet located on the body of the next higher vertebra. Lateral to the head is the narrowed neck of the rib. A small
bump on the posterior rib surface is the tubercle of the rib, which articulates with the facet located on the
transverse process of the same numbered vertebra. The remainder of the rib is the body of the rib (shaft). Just
lateral to the tubercle is the angle of the rib, the point at which the rib has its greatest degree of curvature. The
angles of the ribs form the most posterior extent of the thoracic cage. In the anatomical position, the angles align
with the medial border of the scapula. A shallow costal groove for the passage of blood vessels and a nerve is found
along the inferior margin of each rib.
Rib Classifications
The bony ribs do not extend anteriorly completely around to the sternum. Instead, each rib ends in a costal
cartilage. These cartilages are made of hyaline cartilage and can extend for several inches. Most ribs are then
attached, either directly or indirectly, to the sternum via their costal cartilage (see Figure 7.32). The ribs are
classified into three groups based on their relationship to the sternum.
Ribs 1–7 are classified as true ribs (vertebrosternal ribs). The costal cartilage from each of these ribs attaches
directly to the sternum. Ribs 8–12 are called false ribs (vertebrochondral ribs). The costal cartilages from these ribs
do not attach directly to the sternum. For ribs 8–10, the costal cartilages are attached to the cartilage of the next
higher rib. Thus, the cartilage of rib 10 attaches to the cartilage of rib 9, rib 9 then attaches to rib 8, and rib 8 is
attached to rib 7. The last two false ribs (11–12) are also called floating ribs (vertebral ribs). These are short ribs
that do not attach to the sternum at all. Instead, their small costal cartilages terminate within the musculature of
the lateral abdominal wall.
7.5 Embryonic Development of the Axial Skeleton
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the two types of embryonic bone development within the skull
•
Describe the development of the vertebral column and thoracic cage
The axial skeleton begins to form during early embryonic development. However, growth, remodeling, and
ossification (bone formation) continue for several decades after birth before the adult skeleton is fully formed.
Knowledge of the developmental processes that give rise to the skeleton is important for understanding the
abnormalities that may arise in skeletal structures.
Development of the Skull
During the third week of embryonic development, a rod-like structure called the notochord develops dorsally along
the length of the embryo. The tissue overlying the notochord enlarges and forms the neural tube, which will give rise
to the brain and spinal cord. By the fourth week, mesoderm tissue located on either side of the notochord thickens
and separates into a repeating series of block-like tissue structures, each of which is called a somite. As the somites
enlarge, each one will split into several parts. The most medial of these parts is called a sclerotome. The
sclerotomes consist of an embryonic tissue called mesenchyme, which will give rise to the fibrous connective
tissues, cartilages, and bones of the body.
The bones of the skull arise from mesenchyme during embryonic development in two different ways. The first
mechanism produces the bones that form the top and sides of the brain case. This involves the local accumulation
of mesenchymal cells at the site of the future bone. These cells then differentiate directly into bone producing cells,
which form the skull bones through the process of intramembranous ossification. As the brain case bones grow in
the fetal skull, they remain separated from each other by large areas of dense connective tissue, each of which is
called a fontanelle (Figure 7.33). The fontanelles are the soft spots on an infant’s head. They are important during
birth because these areas allow the skull to change shape as it squeezes through the birth canal. After birth, the
fontanelles allow for continued growth and expansion of the skull as the brain enlarges. The largest fontanelle is
260
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
located on the anterior head, at the junction of the frontal and parietal bones. The fontanelles decrease in size and
disappear by age 2. However, the skull bones remained separated from each other at the sutures, which contain
dense fibrous connective tissue that unites the adjacent bones. The connective tissue of the sutures allows for
continued growth of the skull bones as the brain enlarges during childhood growth.
The second mechanism for bone development in the skull produces the facial bones and floor of the brain case. This
also begins with the localized accumulation of mesenchymal cells. However, these cells differentiate into cartilage
cells, which produce a hyaline cartilage model of the future bone. As this cartilage model grows, it is gradually
converted into bone through the process of endochondral ossification. This is a slow process and the cartilage is not
completely converted to bone until the skull achieves its full adult size.
At birth, the brain case and orbits of the skull are disproportionally large compared to the bones of the jaws and
lower face. This reflects the relative underdevelopment of the maxilla and mandible, which lack teeth, and the small
sizes of the paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity. During early childhood, the mastoid process enlarges, the two halves
of the mandible and frontal bone fuse together to form single bones, and the paranasal sinuses enlarge. The jaws
also expand as the teeth begin to appear. These changes all contribute to the rapid growth and enlargement of the
face during childhood.
FIGURE 7.33
Newborn Skull
The bones of the newborn skull are not fully ossified and are separated by large areas called fontanelles,
which are filled with fibrous connective tissue. The fontanelles allow for continued growth of the skull after birth. At the time of birth, the
facial bones are small and underdeveloped, and the mastoid process has not yet formed.
Development of the Vertebral Column and Thoracic cage
Development of the vertebrae begins with the accumulation of mesenchyme cells from each sclerotome around the
notochord. These cells differentiate into a hyaline cartilage model for each vertebra, which then grow and eventually
ossify into bone through the process of endochondral ossification. As the developing vertebrae grow, the notochord
largely disappears. However, small areas of notochord tissue persist between the adjacent vertebrae and this
contributes to the formation of each intervertebral disc.
The ribs and sternum also develop from mesenchyme. The ribs initially develop as part of the cartilage model for
each vertebra, but in the thorax region, the rib portion separates from the vertebra by the eighth week. The cartilage
model of the rib then ossifies, except for the anterior portion, which remains as the costal cartilage. The sternum
initially forms as paired hyaline cartilage models on either side of the anterior midline, beginning during the fifth
week of development. The cartilage models of the ribs become attached to the lateral sides of the developing
sternum. Eventually, the two halves of the cartilaginous sternum fuse together along the midline and then ossify into
bone. The manubrium and body of the sternum are converted into bone first, with the xiphoid process remaining as
cartilage until late in life.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this video (http://openstax.org/l/skullbones) to review the two processes that give rise to the bones of the skull
and body. What are the two mechanisms by which the bones of the body are formed and which bones are formed by
each mechanism?
7.5 • Embryonic Development of the Axial Skeleton
261
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Craniosynostosis
The premature closure (fusion) of a suture line is a condition called craniosynostosis. This error in the normal
developmental process results in abnormal growth of the skull and deformity of the head. It is produced either by
defects in the ossification process of the skull bones or failure of the brain to properly enlarge. Genetic factors are
involved, but the underlying cause is unknown. It is a relatively common condition, occurring in approximately
1:2000 births, with males being more commonly affected. Primary craniosynostosis involves the early fusion of one
cranial suture, whereas complex craniosynostosis results from the premature fusion of several sutures.
The early fusion of a suture in primary craniosynostosis prevents any additional enlargement of the cranial bones
and skull along this line. Continued growth of the brain and skull is therefore diverted to other areas of the head,
causing an abnormal enlargement of these regions. For example, the early disappearance of the anterior fontanelle
and premature closure of the sagittal suture prevents growth across the top of the head. This is compensated by
upward growth by the bones of the lateral skull, resulting in a long, narrow, wedge-shaped head. This condition,
known as scaphocephaly, accounts for approximately 50 percent of craniosynostosis abnormalities. Although the
skull is misshapen, the brain still has adequate room to grow and thus there is no accompanying abnormal
neurological development.
In cases of complex craniosynostosis, several sutures close prematurely. The amount and degree of skull deformity
is determined by the location and extent of the sutures involved. This results in more severe constraints on skull
growth, which can alter or impede proper brain growth and development.
Cases of craniosynostosis are usually treated with surgery. A team of physicians will open the skull along the fused
suture, which will then allow the skull bones to resume their growth in this area. In some cases, parts of the skull
will be removed and replaced with an artificial plate. The earlier after birth that surgery is performed, the better the
outcome. After treatment, most children continue to grow and develop normally and do not exhibit any neurological
problems.
262
7 • Axial Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
alveolar process of the mandible
upper border of
mandibular body that contains the lower teeth
alveolar process of the maxilla
curved, inferior
margin of the maxilla that supports and anchors the
upper teeth
angle of the mandible
rounded corner located at
outside margin of the body and ramus junction
angle of the rib
portion of rib with greatest curvature;
together, the rib angles form the most posterior
extent of the thoracic cage
anterior (ventral) sacral foramen
one of the series of
paired openings located on the anterior (ventral)
side of the sacrum
anterior arch
anterior portion of the ring-like C1
(atlas) vertebra
anterior cranial fossa
shallowest and most anterior
cranial fossa of the cranial base that extends from
the frontal bone to the lesser wing of the sphenoid
bone
anterior longitudinal ligament
ligament that runs
the length of the vertebral column, uniting the
anterior aspects of the vertebral bodies
anulus fibrosus
tough, fibrous outer portion of an
intervertebral disc, which is strongly anchored to
the bodies of the adjacent vertebrae
appendicular skeleton
all bones of the upper and
lower limbs, plus the girdle bones that attach each
limb to the axial skeleton
articular tubercle
smooth ridge located on the
inferior skull, immediately anterior to the
mandibular fossa
atlas
first cervical (C1) vertebra
axial skeleton
central, vertical axis of the body,
including the skull, vertebral column, and thoracic
cage
axis
second cervical (C2) vertebra
body of the rib
shaft portion of a rib
brain case
portion of the skull that contains and
protects the brain, consisting of the eight bones that
form the cranial base and rounded upper skull
calvaria
(also, skullcap) rounded top of the skull
carotid canal
zig-zag tunnel providing passage
through the base of the skull for the internal carotid
artery to the brain; begins anteromedial to the
styloid process and terminates in the middle cranial
cavity, near the posterior-lateral base of the sella
turcica
cervical curve
posteriorly concave curvature of the
cervical vertebral column region; a secondary curve
of the vertebral column
cervical vertebrae
seven vertebrae numbered as
C1–C7 that are located in the neck region of the
vertebral column
clavicular notch
paired notches located on the
superior-lateral sides of the sternal manubrium, for
articulation with the clavicle
coccyx
small bone located at inferior end of the adult
vertebral column that is formed by the fusion of four
coccygeal vertebrae; also referred to as the
“tailbone”
condylar process of the mandible
thickened upward
projection from posterior margin of mandibular
ramus
condyle
oval-shaped process located at the top of
the condylar process of the mandible
coronal suture
joint that unites the frontal bone to
the right and left parietal bones across the top of
the skull
coronoid process of the mandible
flattened upward
projection from the anterior margin of the
mandibular ramus
costal cartilage
hyaline cartilage structure attached
to the anterior end of each rib that provides for
either direct or indirect attachment of most ribs to
the sternum
costal facet
site on the lateral sides of a thoracic
vertebra for articulation with the head of a rib
costal groove
shallow groove along the inferior
margin of a rib that provides passage for blood
vessels and a nerve
cranial cavity
interior space of the skull that houses
the brain
cranium
skull
cribriform plate
small, flattened areas with
numerous small openings, located to either side of
the midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa;
formed by the ethmoid bone
crista galli
small upward projection located at the
midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa;
formed by the ethmoid bone
dens
bony projection (odontoid process) that extends
upward from the body of the C2 (axis) vertebra
ear ossicles
three small bones located in the middle
ear cavity that serve to transmit sound vibrations to
the inner ear
ethmoid air cell
one of several small, air-filled spaces
located within the lateral sides of the ethmoid bone,
between the orbit and upper nasal cavity
ethmoid bone
unpaired bone that forms the roof and
upper, lateral walls of the nasal cavity, portions of
the floor of the anterior cranial fossa and medial
wall of orbit, and the upper portion of the nasal
septum
external acoustic meatus
ear canal opening located
7 • Key Terms
263
on the lateral side of the skull
external occipital protuberance
small bump located
at the midline on the posterior skull
facet
small, flattened area on a bone for an
articulation (joint) with another bone, or for muscle
attachment
facial bones
fourteen bones that support the facial
structures and form the upper and lower jaws and
the hard palate
false ribs
vertebrochondral ribs 8–12 whose costal
cartilage either attaches indirectly to the sternum
via the costal cartilage of the next higher rib or does
not attach to the sternum at all
floating ribs
vertebral ribs 11–12 that do not attach
to the sternum or to the costal cartilage of another
rib
fontanelle
expanded area of fibrous connective
tissue that separates the brain case bones of the
skull prior to birth and during the first year after
birth
foramen lacerum
irregular opening in the base of the
skull, located inferior to the exit of carotid canal
foramen magnum
large opening in the occipital bone
of the skull through which the spinal cord emerges
and the vertebral arteries enter the cranium
foramen ovale of the middle cranial fossa
oval-
shaped opening in the floor of the middle cranial
fossa
foramen rotundum
round opening in the floor of the
middle cranial fossa, located between the superior
orbital fissure and foramen ovale
foramen spinosum
small opening in the floor of the
middle cranial fossa, located lateral to the foramen
ovale
frontal bone
unpaired bone that forms forehead, roof
of orbit, and floor of anterior cranial fossa
frontal sinus
air-filled space within the frontal bone;
most anterior of the paranasal sinuses
glabella
slight depression of frontal bone, located at
the midline between the eyebrows
greater wings of sphenoid bone
lateral projections
of the sphenoid bone that form the anterior wall of
the middle cranial fossa and an area of the lateral
skull
hard palate
bony structure that forms the roof of the
mouth and floor of the nasal cavity, formed by the
palatine process of the maxillary bones and the
horizontal plate of the palatine bones
head of the rib
posterior end of a rib that articulates
with the bodies of thoracic vertebrae
horizontal plate
medial extension from the palatine
bone that forms the posterior quarter of the hard
palate
hyoid bone
small, U-shaped bone located in upper
neck that does not contact any other bone
hypoglossal canal
paired openings that pass
anteriorly from the anterior-lateral margins of the
foramen magnum deep to the occipital condyles
hypophyseal (pituitary) fossa
shallow depression on
top of the sella turcica that houses the pituitary
(hypophyseal) gland
inferior articular process
bony process that extends
downward from the vertebral arch of a vertebra that
articulates with the superior articular process of the
next lower vertebra
inferior nasal concha
one of the paired bones that
project from the lateral walls of the nasal cavity to
form the largest and most inferior of the nasal
conchae
infraorbital foramen
opening located on anterior
skull, below the orbit
infratemporal fossa
space on lateral side of skull,
below the level of the zygomatic arch and deep
(medial) to the ramus of the mandible
internal acoustic meatus
opening into petrous ridge,
located on the lateral wall of the posterior cranial
fossa
intervertebral disc
structure located between the
bodies of adjacent vertebrae that strongly joins the
vertebrae; provides padding, weight bearing ability,
and enables vertebral column movements
intervertebral foramen
opening located between
adjacent vertebrae for exit of a spinal nerve
jugular (suprasternal) notch
shallow notch located
on superior surface of sternal manubrium
jugular foramen
irregularly shaped opening located
in the lateral floor of the posterior cranial cavity
kyphosis
(also, humpback or hunchback) excessive
posterior curvature of the thoracic vertebral column
region
lacrimal bone
paired bones that contribute to the
anterior-medial wall of each orbit
lacrimal fossa
shallow depression in the anterior-
medial wall of the orbit, formed by the lacrimal bone
that gives rise to the nasolacrimal canal
lambdoid suture
inverted V-shaped joint that unites
the occipital bone to the right and left parietal bones
on the posterior skull
lamina
portion of the vertebral arch on each vertebra
that extends between the transverse and spinous
process
lateral pterygoid plate
paired, flattened bony
projections of the sphenoid bone located on the
inferior skull, lateral to the medial pterygoid plate
lateral sacral crest
paired irregular ridges running
down the lateral sides of the posterior sacrum that
264
7 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
was formed by the fusion of the transverse
processes from the five sacral vertebrae
lesser wings of the sphenoid bone
lateral extensions
of the sphenoid bone that form the bony lip
separating the anterior and middle cranial fossae
ligamentum flavum
series of short ligaments that
unite the lamina of adjacent vertebrae
lingula
small flap of bone located on the inner
(medial) surface of mandibular ramus, next to the
mandibular foramen
lordosis
(also, swayback) excessive anterior
curvature of the lumbar vertebral column region
lumbar curve
posteriorly concave curvature of the
lumbar vertebral column region; a secondary curve
of the vertebral column
lumbar vertebrae
five vertebrae numbered as L1–L5
that are located in lumbar region (lower back) of the
vertebral column
mandible
unpaired bone that forms the lower jaw
bone; the only moveable bone of the skull
mandibular foramen
opening located on the inner
(medial) surface of the mandibular ramus
mandibular fossa
oval depression located on the
inferior surface of the skull
mandibular notch
large U-shaped notch located
between the condylar process and coronoid process
of the mandible
manubrium
expanded, superior portion of the
sternum
mastoid process
large bony prominence on the
inferior, lateral skull, just behind the earlobe
maxillary bone
(also, maxilla) paired bones that form
the upper jaw and anterior portion of the hard palate
maxillary sinus
air-filled space located with each
maxillary bone; largest of the paranasal sinuses
medial pterygoid plate
paired, flattened bony
projections of the sphenoid bone located on the
inferior skull medial to the lateral pterygoid plate;
form the posterior portion of the nasal cavity lateral
wall
median sacral crest
irregular ridge running down the
midline of the posterior sacrum that was formed
from the fusion of the spinous processes of the five
sacral vertebrae
mental foramen
opening located on the anterior-
lateral side of the mandibular body
mental protuberance
inferior margin of anterior
mandible that forms the chin
middle cranial fossa
centrally located cranial fossa
that extends from the lesser wings of the sphenoid
bone to the petrous ridge
middle nasal concha
nasal concha formed by the
ethmoid bone that is located between the superior
and inferior conchae
mylohyoid line
bony ridge located along the inner
(medial) surface of the mandibular body
nasal bone
paired bones that form the base of the
nose
nasal cavity
opening through skull for passage of air
nasal conchae
curved bony plates that project from
the lateral walls of the nasal cavity; include the
superior and middle nasal conchae, which are parts
of the ethmoid bone, and the independent inferior
nasal conchae bone
nasal septum
flat, midline structure that divides the
nasal cavity into halves, formed by the
perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone, vomer
bone, and septal cartilage
nasolacrimal canal
passage for drainage of tears that
extends downward from the medial-anterior orbit to
the nasal cavity, terminating behind the inferior
nasal conchae
neck of the rib
narrowed region of a rib, next to the
rib head
notochord
rod-like structure along dorsal side of the
early embryo; largely disappears during later
development but does contribute to formation of
the intervertebral discs
nuchal ligament
expanded portion of the
supraspinous ligament within the posterior neck;
interconnects the spinous processes of the cervical
vertebrae and attaches to the base of the skull
nucleus pulposus
gel-like central region of an
intervertebral disc; provides for padding, weight-
bearing, and movement between adjacent vertebrae
occipital bone
unpaired bone that forms the
posterior portions of the brain case and base of the
skull
occipital condyle
paired, oval-shaped bony knobs
located on the inferior skull, to either side of the
foramen magnum
optic canal
opening spanning between middle cranial
fossa and posterior orbit
orbit
bony socket that contains the eyeball and
associated muscles
palatine bone
paired bones that form the posterior
quarter of the hard palate and a small area in floor
of the orbit
palatine process
medial projection from the maxilla
bone that forms the anterior three quarters of the
hard palate
paranasal sinuses
cavities within the skull that are
connected to the conchae that serve to warm and
humidify incoming air, produce mucus, and lighten
the weight of the skull; consist of frontal, maxillary,
sphenoidal, and ethmoidal sinuses
7 • Key Terms
265
parietal bone
paired bones that form the upper,
lateral sides of the skull
pedicle
portion of the vertebral arch that extends
from the vertebral body to the transverse process
perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone
downward,
midline extension of the ethmoid bone that forms
the superior portion of the nasal septum
petrous ridge
petrous portion of the temporal bone
that forms a large, triangular ridge in the floor of the
cranial cavity, separating the middle and posterior
cranial fossae; houses the middle and inner ear
structures
posterior (dorsal) sacral foramen
one of the series
of paired openings located on the posterior (dorsal)
side of the sacrum
posterior arch
posterior portion of the ring-like C1
(atlas) vertebra
posterior cranial fossa
deepest and most posterior
cranial fossa; extends from the petrous ridge to the
occipital bone
posterior longitudinal ligament
ligament that runs
the length of the vertebral column, uniting the
posterior sides of the vertebral bodies
primary curve
anteriorly concave curvatures of the
thoracic and sacrococcygeal regions that are
retained from the original fetal curvature of the
vertebral column
pterion
H-shaped suture junction region that unites
the frontal, parietal, temporal, and sphenoid bones
on the lateral side of the skull
ramus of the mandible
vertical portion of the
mandible
ribs
thin, curved bones of the chest wall
sacral canal
bony tunnel that runs through the
sacrum
sacral foramina
series of paired openings for nerve
exit located on both the anterior (ventral) and
posterior (dorsal) aspects of the sacrum
sacral hiatus
inferior opening and termination of the
sacral canal
sacral promontory
anterior lip of the base (superior
end) of the sacrum
sacrococcygeal curve
anteriorly concave curvature
formed by the sacrum and coccyx; a primary curve
of the vertebral column
sacrum
single bone located near the inferior end of
the adult vertebral column that is formed by the
fusion of five sacral vertebrae; forms the posterior
portion of the pelvis
sagittal suture
joint that unites the right and left
parietal bones at the midline along the top of the
skull
sclerotome
medial portion of a somite consisting of
mesenchyme tissue that will give rise to bone,
cartilage, and fibrous connective tissues
scoliosis
abnormal lateral curvature of the vertebral
column
secondary curve
posteriorly concave curvatures of
the cervical and lumbar regions of the vertebral
column that develop after the time of birth
sella turcica
elevated area of sphenoid bone located
at midline of the middle cranial fossa
septal cartilage
flat cartilage structure that forms the
anterior portion of the nasal septum
skeleton
bones of the body
skull
bony structure that forms the head, face, and
jaws, and protects the brain; consists of 22 bones
somite
one of the paired, repeating blocks of tissue
located on either side of the notochord in the early
embryo
sphenoid bone
unpaired bone that forms the central
base of skull
sphenoid sinus
air-filled space located within the
sphenoid bone; most posterior of the paranasal
sinuses
spinous process
unpaired bony process that extends
posteriorly from the vertebral arch of a vertebra
squamous suture
joint that unites the parietal bone
to the squamous portion of the temporal bone on
the lateral side of the skull
sternal angle
junction line between manubrium and
body of the sternum and the site for attachment of
the second rib to the sternum
sternum
flattened bone located at the center of the
anterior chest
styloid process
downward projecting, elongated
bony process located on the inferior aspect of the
skull
stylomastoid foramen
opening located on inferior
skull, between the styloid process and mastoid
process
superior articular process
bony process that extends
upward from the vertebral arch of a vertebra that
articulates with the inferior articular process of the
next higher vertebra
superior articular process of the sacrum
paired
processes that extend upward from the sacrum to
articulate (join) with the inferior articular processes
from the L5 vertebra
superior nasal concha
smallest and most superiorly
located of the nasal conchae; formed by the
ethmoid bone
superior nuchal line
paired bony lines on the
posterior skull that extend laterally from the
external occipital protuberance
superior orbital fissure
irregularly shaped opening
266
7 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
between the middle cranial fossa and the posterior
orbit
supraorbital foramen
opening located on anterior
skull, at the superior margin of the orbit
supraorbital margin
superior margin of the orbit
supraspinous ligament
ligament that interconnects
the spinous processes of the thoracic and lumbar
vertebrae
suture
junction line at which adjacent bones of the
skull are united by fibrous connective tissue
temporal bone
paired bones that form the lateral,
inferior portions of the skull, with squamous,
mastoid, and petrous portions
temporal fossa
shallow space on the lateral side of
the skull, above the level of the zygomatic arch
temporal process of the zygomatic bone
short
extension from the zygomatic bone that forms the
anterior portion of the zygomatic arch
thoracic cage
consists of 12 pairs of ribs and sternum
thoracic curve
anteriorly concave curvature of the
thoracic vertebral column region; a primary curve of
the vertebral column
thoracic vertebrae
twelve vertebrae numbered as
T1–T12 that are located in the thoracic region
(upper back) of the vertebral column
transverse foramen
opening found only in the
transverse processes of cervical vertebrae
transverse process
paired bony processes that
extends laterally from the vertebral arch of a
vertebra
true ribs
vertebrosternal ribs 1–7 that attach via their
costal cartilage directly to the sternum
tubercle of the rib
small bump on the posterior side
of a rib for articulation with the transverse process
of a thoracic vertebra
vertebra
individual bone in the neck and back regions
of the vertebral column
vertebral (spinal) canal
bony passageway within the
vertebral column for the spinal cord that is formed
by the series of individual vertebral foramina
vertebral arch
bony arch formed by the posterior
portion of each vertebra that surrounds and
protects the spinal cord
vertebral column
entire sequence of bones that
extend from the skull to the tailbone
vertebral foramen
opening associated with each
vertebra defined by the vertebral arch that provides
passage for the spinal cord
vomer bone
unpaired bone that forms the inferior
and posterior portions of the nasal septum
xiphoid process
small process that forms the inferior
tip of the sternum
zygomatic arch
elongated, free-standing arch on the
lateral skull, formed anteriorly by the temporal
process of the zygomatic bone and posteriorly by
the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
zygomatic bone
cheekbone; paired bones that
contribute to the lateral orbit and anterior zygomatic
arch
zygomatic process of the temporal bone
extension
from the temporal bone that forms the posterior
portion of the zygomatic arch
Chapter Review
7.1 Divisions of the Skeletal System
The skeletal system includes all of the bones,
cartilages, and ligaments of the body. It serves to
support the body, protect the brain and other internal
organs, and provides a rigid structure upon which
muscles can pull to generate body movements. It also
stores fat and the tissue responsible for the production
of blood cells. The skeleton is subdivided into two
parts. The axial skeleton forms a vertical axis that
includes the head, neck, back, and chest. It has 80
bones and consists of the skull, vertebral column, and
thoracic cage. The adult vertebral column consists of
24 vertebrae plus the sacrum and coccyx. The thoracic
cage is formed by 12 pairs of ribs and the sternum. The
appendicular skeleton consists of 126 bones in the
adult and includes all of the bones of the upper and
lower limbs plus the bones that anchor each limb to
the axial skeleton.
7.2 The Skull
The skull consists of the brain case and the facial
bones. The brain case surrounds and protects the
brain, which occupies the cranial cavity inside the skull.
It consists of the rounded calvaria and a complex base.
The brain case is formed by eight bones, the paired
parietal and temporal bones plus the unpaired frontal,
occipital, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones. The narrow
gap between the bones is filled with dense, fibrous
connective tissue that unites the bones. The sagittal
suture joins the right and left parietal bones. The
coronal suture joins the parietal bones to the frontal
bone, the lambdoid suture joins them to the occipital
bone, and the squamous suture joins them to the
temporal bone.
The facial bones support the facial structures and form
the upper and lower jaws. These consist of 14 bones,
with the paired maxillary, palatine, zygomatic, nasal,
lacrimal, and inferior conchae bones and the unpaired
7 • Chapter Review
267
vomer and mandible bones. The ethmoid bone also
contributes to the formation of facial structures. The
maxilla forms the upper jaw and the mandible forms
the lower jaw. The maxilla also forms the larger
anterior portion of the hard palate, which is completed
by the smaller palatine bones that form the posterior
portion of the hard palate.
The floor of the cranial cavity increases in depth from
front to back and is divided into three cranial fossae.
The anterior cranial fossa is located between the
frontal bone and lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. A
small area of the ethmoid bone, consisting of the crista
galli and cribriform plates, is located at the midline of
this fossa. The middle cranial fossa extends from the
lesser wing of the sphenoid bone to the petrous ridge
(petrous portion of temporal bone). The right and left
sides are separated at the midline by the sella turcica,
which surrounds the shallow hypophyseal fossa.
Openings through the skull in the floor of the middle
fossa include the optic canal and superior orbital
fissure, which open into the posterior orbit, the
foramen rotundum, foramen ovale, and foramen
spinosum, and the exit of the carotid canal with its
underlying foramen lacerum. The deep posterior
cranial fossa extends from the petrous ridge to the
occipital bone. Openings here include the large
foramen magnum, plus the internal acoustic meatus,
jugular foramina, and hypoglossal canals. Additional
openings located on the external base of the skull
include the stylomastoid foramen and the entrance to
the carotid canal.
The anterior skull has the orbits that house the
eyeballs and associated muscles. The walls of the orbit
are formed by contributions from seven bones: the
frontal, zygomatic, maxillary, palatine, ethmoid,
lacrimal, and sphenoid. Located at the superior margin
of the orbit is the supraorbital foramen, and below the
orbit is the infraorbital foramen. The mandible has two
openings, the mandibular foramen on its inner surface
and the mental foramen on its external surface near
the chin. The nasal conchae are bony projections from
the lateral walls of the nasal cavity. The large inferior
nasal concha is an independent bone, while the middle
and superior conchae are parts of the ethmoid bone.
The nasal septum is formed by the perpendicular plate
of the ethmoid bone, the vomer bone, and the septal
cartilage. The paranasal sinuses are air-filled spaces
located within the frontal, maxillary, sphenoid, and
ethmoid bones.
On the lateral skull, the zygomatic arch consists of two
parts, the temporal process of the zygomatic bone
anteriorly and the zygomatic process of the temporal
bone posteriorly. The temporal fossa is the shallow
space located on the lateral skull above the level of the
zygomatic arch. The infratemporal fossa is located
below the zygomatic arch and deep to the ramus of the
mandible.
The hyoid bone is located in the upper neck and does
not join with any other bone. It is held in position by
muscles and serves to support the tongue above, the
larynx below, and the pharynx posteriorly.
7.3 The Vertebral Column
The vertebral column forms the neck and back. The
vertebral column originally develops as 33 vertebrae,
but is eventually reduced to 24 vertebrae, plus the
sacrum and coccyx. The vertebrae are divided into the
cervical region (C1–C7 vertebrae), the thoracic region
(T1–T12 vertebrae), and the lumbar region (L1–L5
vertebrae). The sacrum arises from the fusion of five
sacral vertebrae and the coccyx from the fusion of four
small coccygeal vertebrae. The vertebral column has
four curvatures, the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and
sacrococcygeal curves. The thoracic and
sacrococcygeal curves are primary curves retained
from the original fetal curvature. The cervical and
lumbar curves develop after birth and thus are
secondary curves. The cervical curve develops as the
infant begins to hold up the head, and the lumbar curve
appears with standing and walking.
A typical vertebra consists of an enlarged anterior
portion called the body, which provides weight-bearing
support. Attached posteriorly to the body is a vertebral
arch, which surrounds and defines the vertebral
foramen for passage of the spinal cord. The vertebral
arch consists of the pedicles, which attach to the
vertebral body, and the laminae, which come together
to form the roof of the arch. Arising from the vertebral
arch are the laterally projecting transverse processes
and the posteriorly oriented spinous process. The
superior articular processes project upward, where
they articulate with the downward projecting inferior
articular processes of the next higher vertebrae.
A typical cervical vertebra has a small body, a bifid (Y-
shaped) spinous process, and U-shaped transverse
processes with a transverse foramen. In addition to
these characteristics, the axis (C2 vertebra) also has
the dens projecting upward from the vertebral body.
The atlas (C1 vertebra) differs from the other cervical
vertebrae in that it does not have a body, but instead
consists of bony ring formed by the anterior and
posterior arches. The atlas articulates with the dens
from the axis. A typical thoracic vertebra is
distinguished by its long, downward projecting spinous
268
7 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
process. Thoracic vertebrae also have articulation
facets on the body and transverse processes for
attachment of the ribs. Lumbar vertebrae support the
greatest amount of body weight and thus have a large,
thick body. They also have a short, blunt spinous
process. The sacrum is triangular in shape. The median
sacral crest is formed by the fused vertebral spinous
processes and the lateral sacral crest is derived from
the fused transverse processes. Anterior (ventral) and
posterior (dorsal) sacral foramina allow branches of the
sacral spinal nerves to exit the sacrum. The auricular
surfaces are articulation sites on the lateral sacrum
that anchor the sacrum to the hipbones to form the
pelvis. The coccyx is small and derived from the fusion
of four small vertebrae.
The intervertebral discs fill in the gaps between the
bodies of adjacent vertebrae. They provide strong
attachments and padding between the vertebrae. The
outer, fibrous layer of a disc is called the anulus
fibrosus. The gel-like interior is called the nucleus
pulposus. The disc can change shape to allow for
movement between vertebrae. If the anulus fibrosus is
weakened or damaged, the nucleus pulposus can
protrude outward, resulting in a herniated disc.
The anterior longitudinal ligament runs along the full
length of the anterior vertebral column, uniting the
vertebral bodies. The supraspinous ligament is located
posteriorly and interconnects the spinous processes of
the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. In the neck, this
ligament expands to become the nuchal ligament. The
nuchal ligament is attached to the cervical spinous
processes and superiorly to the base of the skull, out to
the external occipital protuberance. The posterior
longitudinal ligament runs within the vertebral canal
and unites the posterior sides of the vertebral bodies.
The ligamentum flavum unites the lamina of adjacent
vertebrae.
7.4 The Thoracic Cage
The thoracic cage protects the heart and lungs. It is
composed of 12 pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages
and the sternum. The ribs are anchored posteriorly to
the 12 thoracic vertebrae. The sternum consists of the
manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The
manubrium and body are joined at the sternal angle,
which is also the site for attachment of the second ribs.
Ribs are flattened, curved bones and are numbered
1–12. Posteriorly, the head of the rib articulates with
the costal facets located on the bodies of thoracic
vertebrae and the rib tubercle articulates with the facet
located on the vertebral transverse process. The angle
of the ribs forms the most posterior portion of the
thoracic cage. The costal groove in the inferior margin
of each rib carries blood vessels and a nerve.
Anteriorly, each rib ends in a costal cartilage. True ribs
(1–7) attach directly to the sternum via their costal
cartilage. The false ribs (8–12) either attach to the
sternum indirectly or not at all. Ribs 8–10 have their
costal cartilages attached to the cartilage of the next
higher rib. The floating ribs (11–12) are short and do
not attach to the sternum or to another rib.
7.5 Embryonic Development of the Axial
Skeleton
Formation of the axial skeleton begins during early
embryonic development with the appearance of the
rod-like notochord along the dorsal length of the early
embryo. Repeating, paired blocks of tissue called
somites then appear along either side of notochord. As
the somites grow, they split into parts, one of which is
called a sclerotome. This consists of mesenchyme, the
embryonic tissue that will become the bones,
cartilages, and connective tissues of the body.
Mesenchyme in the head region will produce the bones
of the skull via two different mechanisms. The bones of
the brain case arise via intramembranous ossification
in which embryonic mesenchyme tissue converts
directly into bone. At the time of birth, these bones are
separated by fontanelles, wide areas of fibrous
connective tissue. As the bones grow, the fontanelles
are reduced to sutures, which allow for continued
growth of the skull throughout childhood. In contrast,
the cranial base and facial bones are produced by the
process of endochondral ossification, in which
mesenchyme tissue initially produces a hyaline
cartilage model of the future bone. The cartilage model
allows for growth of the bone and is gradually
converted into bone over a period of many years.
The vertebrae, ribs, and sternum also develop via
endochondral ossification. Mesenchyme accumulates
around the notochord and produces hyaline cartilage
models of the vertebrae. The notochord largely
disappears, but remnants of the notochord contribute
to formation of the intervertebral discs. In the thorax
region, a portion of the vertebral cartilage model splits
off to form the ribs. These then become attached
anteriorly to the developing cartilage model of the
sternum. Growth of the cartilage models for the
vertebrae, ribs, and sternum allow for enlargement of
the thoracic cage during childhood and adolescence.
The cartilage models gradually undergo ossification
and are converted into bone.
7 • Chapter Review
269
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/skull1) to
view a rotating and exploded skull with color-coded
bones. Which bone (yellow) is centrally located and
joins with most of the other bones of the skull?
2. View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
headblow) to see how a blow to the head may
produce a contrecoup (counterblow) fracture of the
basilar portion of the occipital bone on the base of
the skull. Why may a basilar fracture be life
threatening?
3. Osteoporosis is a common age-related bone
disease in which bone density and strength is
decreased. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
osteoporosis) to get a better understanding of how
thoracic vertebrae may become weakened and may
fractured due to this disease. How may vertebral
osteoporosis contribute to kyphosis?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/herndisc1)
to learn about a herniated disc. Watch this second
video (http://openstax.org/l/herndisc2) to see one
possible treatment for a herniated disc, removing
the damaged portion of the disc. How could lifting a
heavy object produce pain in a lower limb?
5. Use this tool (http://openstax.org/l/vertcolumn) to
identify the bones, intervertebral discs, and
ligaments of the vertebral column. The thickest
portions of the anterior longitudinal ligament and
the supraspinous ligament are found in which
regions of the vertebral column?
6. View this video (http://openstax.org/l/skullbones)
to review the two processes that give rise to the
bones of the skull and body. What are the two
mechanisms by which the bones of the body are
formed and which bones are formed by each
mechanism?
Review Questions
7. Which of the following is part of the axial skeleton?
a.
shoulder bones
b.
thigh bone
c.
foot bones
d.
vertebral column
8. Which of the following is a function of the axial
skeleton?
a.
allows for movement of the wrist and hand
b.
protects nerves and blood vessels at the elbow
c.
supports trunk of body
d.
allows for movements of the ankle and foot
9. The axial skeleton ________.
a.
consists of 126 bones
b.
forms the vertical axis of the body
c.
includes all bones of the body trunk and limbs
d.
includes only the bones of the lower limbs
10. Which of the following is a bone of the brain case?
a.
parietal bone
b.
zygomatic bone
c.
maxillary bone
d.
lacrimal bone
11. The lambdoid suture joins the parietal bone to the
________.
a.
frontal bone
b.
occipital bone
c.
other parietal bone
d.
temporal bone
12. The middle cranial fossa ________.
a.
is bounded anteriorly by the petrous ridge
b.
is bounded posteriorly by the lesser wing of
the sphenoid bone
c.
is divided at the midline by a small area of the
ethmoid bone
d.
has the foramen rotundum, foramen ovale,
and foramen spinosum
13. The paranasal sinuses are ________.
a.
air-filled spaces found within the frontal,
maxilla, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones only
b.
air-filled spaces found within all bones of the
skull
c.
not connected to the nasal cavity
d.
divided at the midline by the nasal septum
14. Parts of the sphenoid bone include the ________.
a.
sella turcica
b.
squamous portion
c.
glabella
d.
zygomatic process
15. The bony openings of the skull include the
________.
a.
carotid canal, which is located in the anterior
cranial fossa
b.
superior orbital fissure, which is located at the
superior margin of the anterior orbit
c.
mental foramen, which is located just below
the orbit
d.
hypoglossal canal, which is located in the
posterior cranial fossa
270
7 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
16. The cervical region of the vertebral column
consists of ________.
a.
seven vertebrae
b.
12 vertebrae
c.
five vertebrae
d.
a single bone derived from the fusion of five
vertebrae
17. The primary curvatures of the vertebral column
________.
a.
include the lumbar curve
b.
are remnants of the original fetal curvature
c.
include the cervical curve
d.
develop after the time of birth
18. A typical vertebra has ________.
a.
a vertebral foramen that passes through the
body
b.
a superior articular process that projects
downward to articulate with the superior
portion of the next lower vertebra
c.
lamina that spans between the transverse
process and spinous process
d.
a pair of laterally projecting spinous
processes
19. A typical lumbar vertebra has ________.
a.
a short, rounded spinous process
b.
a bifid spinous process
c.
articulation sites for ribs
d.
a transverse foramen
20. Which is found only in the cervical region of the
vertebral column?
a.
nuchal ligament
b.
ligamentum flavum
c.
supraspinous ligament
d.
anterior longitudinal ligament
21. The sternum ________.
a.
consists of only two parts, the manubrium
and xiphoid process
b.
has the sternal angle located between the
manubrium and body
c.
receives direct attachments from the costal
cartilages of all 12 pairs of ribs
d.
articulates directly with the thoracic
vertebrae
22. The sternal angle is the ________.
a.
junction between the body and xiphoid
process
b.
site for attachment of the clavicle
c.
site for attachment of the floating ribs
d.
junction between the manubrium and body
23. The tubercle of a rib ________.
a.
is for articulation with the transverse process
of a thoracic vertebra
b.
is for articulation with the body of a thoracic
vertebra
c.
provides for passage of blood vessels and a
nerve
d.
is the area of greatest rib curvature
24. True ribs are ________.
a.
ribs 8–12
b.
attached via their costal cartilage to the next
higher rib
c.
made entirely of bone, and thus do not have a
costal cartilage
d.
attached via their costal cartilage directly to
the sternum
25. Embryonic development of the axial skeleton
involves ________.
a.
intramembranous ossification, which forms
the facial bones.
b.
endochondral ossification, which forms the
ribs and sternum
c.
the notochord, which produces the cartilage
models for the vertebrae
d.
the formation of hyaline cartilage models,
which give rise to the flat bones of the skull
26. A fontanelle ________.
a.
is the cartilage model for a vertebra that later
is converted into bone
b.
gives rise to the facial bones and vertebrae
c.
is the rod-like structure that runs the length of
the early embryo
d.
is the area of fibrous connective tissue found
at birth between the brain case bones
Critical Thinking Questions
27. Define the two divisions of the skeleton.
28. Discuss the functions of the axial skeleton.
29. Define and list the bones that form the brain case
or support the facial structures.
30. Identify the major sutures of the skull, their
locations, and the bones united by each.
7 • Critical Thinking Questions
271
31. Describe the anterior, middle, and posterior
cranial fossae and their boundaries, and give the
midline structure that divides each into right and
left areas.
32. Describe the parts of the nasal septum in both the
dry and living skull.
33. Describe the vertebral column and define each
region.
34. Describe a typical vertebra.
35. Describe the sacrum.
36. Describe the structure and function of an
intervertebral disc.
37. Define the ligaments of the vertebral column.
38. Define the parts and functions of the thoracic
cage.
39. Describe the parts of the sternum.
40. Discuss the parts of a typical rib.
41. Define the classes of ribs.
42. Discuss the processes by which the brain-case
bones of the skull are formed and grow during
skull enlargement.
43. Discuss the process that gives rise to the base and
facial bones of the skull.
44. Discuss the development of the vertebrae, ribs,
and sternum.
272
7 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 8
The Appendicular Skeleton
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the bones of the pectoral and pelvic girdles, and describe how these unite the limbs with the axial
skeleton
•
Describe the bones of the upper limb, including the bones of the arm, forearm, wrist, and hand
•
Identify the features of the pelvis and explain how these differ between the adult male and female pelvis
•
Describe the bones of the lower limb, including the bones of the thigh, leg, ankle, and foot
•
Describe the embryonic formation and growth of the limb bones
Your skeleton provides the internal supporting structure of the body. The adult axial skeleton
consists of 80 bones that form the head and body trunk. Attached to this are the limbs, whose 126 bones constitute
the appendicular skeleton. These bones are divided into two groups: the bones that are located within the limbs
themselves, and the girdle bones that attach the limbs to the axial skeleton. The bones of the shoulder region form
the pectoral girdle, which anchors the upper limb to the thoracic cage of the axial skeleton. The lower limb is
attached to the vertebral column by the pelvic girdle.
Because of our upright stance, different functional demands are placed upon the upper and lower limbs. Thus, the
bones of the lower limbs are adapted for weight-bearing support and stability, as well as for body locomotion via
walking or running. In contrast, our upper limbs are not required for these functions. Instead, our upper limbs are
highly mobile and can be utilized for a wide variety of activities. The large range of upper limb movements, coupled
with the ability to easily manipulate objects with our hands and opposable thumbs, has allowed humans to
construct the modern world in which we live.
8.1 The Pectoral Girdle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the bones that form the pectoral girdle
•
List the functions of the pectoral girdle
The appendicular skeleton includes all of the limb bones, plus the bones that unite each limb with the axial skeleton
Figure 8.1
Dancer The appendicular skeleton consists of the upper and lower limb bones, the bones of the hands and feet, and the bones
that anchor the limbs to the axial skeleton. (credit: Melissa Dooley/flickr)
(Figure 8.2). The bones that attach each upper limb to the axial skeleton form the pectoral girdle (shoulder girdle).
This consists of two bones, the scapula and clavicle (Figure 8.3). The clavicle (collarbone) is an S-shaped bone
located on the anterior side of the shoulder. It is attached on its medial end to the sternum of the thoracic cage,
which is part of the axial skeleton. The lateral end of the clavicle articulates (joins) with the scapula just above the
shoulder joint. You can easily palpate, or feel with your fingers, the entire length of your clavicle.
FIGURE 8.2
Axial and Appendicular Skeletons
The axial skeleton forms the central axis of the body and consists of the skull,
vertebral column, and thoracic cage. The appendicular skeleton consists of the pectoral and pelvic girdles, the limb bones, and the bones of
the hands and feet.
274
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 8.3
Pectoral Girdle
The pectoral girdle consists of the clavicle and the scapula, which serve to attach the upper limb to the
sternum of the axial skeleton.
The scapula (shoulder blade) lies on the posterior aspect of the shoulder. It is supported by the clavicle and
articulates with the humerus (arm bone) to form the shoulder joint. The scapula is a flat, triangular-shaped bone
with a prominent ridge running across its posterior surface. This ridge extends out laterally, where it forms the bony
tip of the shoulder and joins with the lateral end of the clavicle. By following along the clavicle, you can palpate out
to the bony tip of the shoulder, and from there, you can move back across your posterior shoulder to follow the ridge
of the scapula. Move your shoulder around and feel how the clavicle and scapula move together as a unit. Both of
these bones serve as important attachment sites for muscles that aid with movements of the shoulder and arm.
The right and left pectoral girdles are not joined to each other, allowing each to operate independently. In addition,
the clavicle of each pectoral girdle is anchored to the axial skeleton by a single, highly mobile joint. This allows for
the extensive mobility of the entire pectoral girdle, which in turn enhances movements of the shoulder and upper
limb.
Clavicle
The clavicle is the only long bone that lies in a horizontal position in the body (see Figure 8.3). The clavicle has
8.1 • The Pectoral Girdle
275
several important functions. First, anchored by muscles from above, it serves as a strut that extends laterally to
support the scapula. This in turn holds the shoulder joint superiorly and laterally from the body trunk, allowing for
maximal freedom of motion for the upper limb. The clavicle also transmits forces acting on the upper limb to the
sternum and axial skeleton. Finally, it serves to protect the underlying nerves and blood vessels as they pass
between the trunk of the body and the upper limb.
The clavicle has three regions: the medial end, the lateral end, and the shaft. The medial end, known as the sternal
end of the clavicle, has a triangular shape and articulates with the manubrium portion of the sternum. This forms
the sternoclavicular joint, which is the only bony articulation between the pectoral girdle of the upper limb and the
axial skeleton. This joint allows considerable mobility, enabling the clavicle and scapula to move in upward/
downward and anterior/posterior directions during shoulder movements. The sternoclavicular joint is indirectly
supported by the costoclavicular ligament (costo- = “rib”), which spans the sternal end of the clavicle and the
underlying first rib. The lateral or acromial end of the clavicle articulates with the acromion of the scapula, the
portion of the scapula that forms the bony tip of the shoulder. There are some sex differences in the morphology of
the clavicle. In females, the clavicle tends to be shorter, thinner, and less curved. In males, the clavicle is heavier
and longer, and has a greater curvature and rougher surfaces where muscles attach, features that are more
pronounced in manual workers.
The clavicle is the most commonly fractured bone in the body. Such breaks often occur because of the force exerted
on the clavicle when a person falls onto their outstretched arms, or when the lateral shoulder receives a strong
blow. Because the sternoclavicular joint is strong and rarely dislocated, excessive force results in the breaking of the
clavicle, usually between the middle and lateral portions of the bone. If the fracture is complete, the shoulder and
lateral clavicle fragment will drop due to the weight of the upper limb, causing the person to support the sagging
limb with their other hand. Muscles acting across the shoulder will also pull the shoulder and lateral clavicle
anteriorly and medially, causing the clavicle fragments to override. The clavicle overlies many important blood
vessels and nerves for the upper limb, but fortunately, due to the anterior displacement of a broken clavicle, these
structures are rarely affected when the clavicle is fractured.
Scapula
The scapula is also part of the pectoral girdle and thus plays an important role in anchoring the upper limb to the
body. The scapula is located on the posterior side of the shoulder. It is surrounded by muscles on both its anterior
(deep) and posterior (superficial) sides, and thus does not articulate with the ribs of the thoracic cage.
The scapula has several important landmarks (Figure 8.4). The three margins or borders of the scapula, named for
their positions within the body, are the superior border of the scapula, the medial border of the scapula, and the
lateral border of the scapula. The suprascapular notch is located lateral to the midpoint of the superior border.
The corners of the triangular scapula, at either end of the medial border, are the superior angle of the scapula,
located between the medial and superior borders, and the inferior angle of the scapula, located between the
medial and lateral borders. The inferior angle is the most inferior portion of the scapula, and is particularly important
because it serves as the attachment point for several powerful muscles involved in shoulder and upper limb
movements. The remaining corner of the scapula, between the superior and lateral borders, is the location of the
glenoid cavity (glenoid fossa). This shallow depression articulates with the humerus bone of the arm to form the
glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint). The small bony bumps located immediately above and below the glenoid cavity
are the supraglenoid tubercle and the infraglenoid tubercle, respectively. These provide attachments for muscles
of the arm.
276
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 8.4
Scapula
The isolated scapula is shown here from its anterior (deep) side and its posterior (superficial) side.
The scapula also has two prominent projections. Toward the lateral end of the superior border, between the
suprascapular notch and glenoid cavity, is the hook-like coracoid process (coracoid = “shaped like a crow’s beak”).
This process projects anteriorly and curves laterally. At the shoulder, the coracoid process is located inferior to the
lateral end of the clavicle. It is anchored to the clavicle by a strong ligament, and serves as the attachment site for
muscles of the anterior chest and arm. On the posterior aspect, the spine of the scapula is a long and prominent
ridge that runs across its upper portion. Extending laterally from the spine is a flattened and expanded region called
the acromion or acromial process. The acromion forms the bony tip of the superior shoulder region and articulates
with the lateral end of the clavicle, forming the acromioclavicular joint (see Figure 8.3). Together, the clavicle,
acromion, and spine of the scapula form a V-shaped bony line that provides for the attachment of neck and back
muscles that act on the shoulder, as well as muscles that pass across the shoulder joint to act on the arm.
The scapula has three depressions, each of which is called a fossa (plural = fossae). Two of these are found on the
posterior scapula, above and below the scapular spine. Superior to the spine is the narrow supraspinous fossa, and
inferior to the spine is the broad infraspinous fossa. The anterior (deep) surface of the scapula forms the broad
subscapular fossa. All of these fossae provide large surface areas for the attachment of muscles that cross the
shoulder joint to act on the humerus.
The acromioclavicular joint transmits forces from the upper limb to the clavicle. The ligaments around this joint are
relatively weak. A hard fall onto the elbow or outstretched hand can stretch or tear the acromioclavicular ligaments,
resulting in a moderate injury to the joint. However, the primary support for the acromioclavicular joint comes from a
very strong ligament called the coracoclavicular ligament (see Figure 8.3). This connective tissue band anchors the
coracoid process of the scapula to the inferior surface of the acromial end of the clavicle and thus provides
important indirect support for the acromioclavicular joint. Following a strong blow to the lateral shoulder, such as
when a hockey player is driven into the boards, a complete dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint can result. In
this case, the acromion is thrust under the acromial end of the clavicle, resulting in ruptures of both the
acromioclavicular and coracoclavicular ligaments. The scapula then separates from the clavicle, with the weight of
the upper limb pulling the shoulder downward. This dislocation injury of the acromioclavicular joint is known as a
“shoulder separation” and is common in contact sports such as hockey, football, or martial arts.
8.2 Bones of the Upper Limb
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the divisions of the upper limb and describe the bones in each region
•
List the bones and bony landmarks that articulate at each joint of the upper limb
8.2 • Bones of the Upper Limb
277
The upper limb is divided into three regions. These consist of the arm, located between the shoulder and elbow
joints; the forearm, which is between the elbow and wrist joints; and the hand, which is located distal to the wrist.
There are 30 bones in each upper limb (see Figure 8.2). The humerus is the single bone of the upper arm, and the
ulna (medially) and the radius (laterally) are the paired bones of the forearm. The base of the hand contains eight
bones, each called a carpal bone, and the palm of the hand is formed by five bones, each called a metacarpal bone.
The fingers and thumb contain a total of 14 bones, each of which is a phalanx bone of the hand.
Humerus
The humerus is the single bone of the upper arm region (Figure 8.5). At its proximal end is the head of the humerus.
This is the large, round, smooth region that faces medially. The head articulates with the glenoid cavity of the
scapula to form the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint. The margin of the smooth area of the head is the anatomical
neck of the humerus. Located on the lateral side of the proximal humerus is an expanded bony area called the
greater tubercle. The smaller lesser tubercle of the humerus is found on the anterior aspect of the humerus. Both
the greater and lesser tubercles serve as attachment sites for muscles that act across the shoulder joint. Passing
between the greater and lesser tubercles is the narrow intertubercular groove (sulcus), which is also known as the
bicipital groove because it provides passage for a tendon of the biceps brachii muscle. The surgical neck is located
at the base of the expanded, proximal end of the humerus, where it joins the narrow shaft of the humerus. The
surgical neck is a common site of arm fractures. The deltoid tuberosity is a roughened, V-shaped region located on
the lateral side in the middle of the humerus shaft. As its name indicates, it is the site of attachment for the deltoid
muscle.
FIGURE 8.5
Humerus and Elbow Joint
The humerus is the single bone of the upper arm region. It articulates with the radius and ulna
bones of the forearm to form the elbow joint.
Distally, the humerus becomes flattened. The prominent bony projection on the medial side is the medial
epicondyle of the humerus. The much smaller lateral epicondyle of the humerus is found on the lateral side of the
distal humerus. The roughened ridge of bone above the lateral epicondyle is the lateral supracondylar ridge. All of
these areas are attachment points for muscles that act on the forearm, wrist, and hand. The powerful grasping
278
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
muscles of the anterior forearm arise from the medial epicondyle, which is thus larger and more robust than the
lateral epicondyle that gives rise to the weaker posterior forearm muscles.
The distal end of the humerus has two articulation areas, which join the ulna and radius bones of the forearm to
form the elbow joint. The more medial of these areas is the trochlea, a spindle- or pulley-shaped region (trochlea =
“pulley”), which articulates with the ulna bone. Immediately lateral to the trochlea is the capitulum (“small head”),
a knob-like structure located on the anterior surface of the distal humerus. The capitulum articulates with the radius
bone of the forearm. Just above these bony areas are two small depressions. These spaces accommodate the
forearm bones when the elbow is fully bent (flexed). Superior to the trochlea is the coronoid fossa, which receives
the coronoid process of the ulna, and above the capitulum is the radial fossa, which receives the head of the radius
when the elbow is flexed. Similarly, the posterior humerus has the olecranon fossa, a larger depression that
receives the olecranon process of the ulna when the forearm is fully extended.
Ulna
The ulna is the medial bone of the forearm. It runs parallel to the radius, which is the lateral bone of the forearm
(Figure 8.6). The proximal end of the ulna resembles a crescent wrench with its large, C-shaped trochlear notch.
This region articulates with the trochlea of the humerus as part of the elbow joint. The inferior margin of the
trochlear notch is formed by a prominent lip of bone called the coronoid process of the ulna. Just below this on the
anterior ulna is a roughened area called the ulnar tuberosity. To the lateral side and slightly inferior to the trochlear
notch is a small, smooth area called the radial notch of the ulna. This area is the site of articulation between the
proximal radius and the ulna, forming the proximal radioulnar joint. The posterior and superior portions of the
proximal ulna make up the olecranon process, which forms the bony tip of the elbow.
FIGURE 8.6
Ulna and Radius
The ulna is located on the medial side of the forearm, and the radius is on the lateral side. These bones
are attached to each other by an interosseous membrane.
More distal is the shaft of the ulna. The lateral side of the shaft forms a ridge called the interosseous border of the
8.2 • Bones of the Upper Limb
279
ulna. This is the line of attachment for the interosseous membrane of the forearm, a sheet of dense connective
tissue that unites the ulna and radius bones. The small, rounded area that forms the distal end is the head of the
ulna. Projecting from the posterior side of the ulnar head is the styloid process of the ulna, a short bony projection.
This serves as an attachment point for a connective tissue structure that unites the distal ends of the ulna and
radius.
In the anatomical position, with the elbow fully extended and the palms facing forward, the arm and forearm do not
form a straight line. Instead, the forearm deviates laterally by 5–15 degrees from the line of the arm. This deviation
is called the carrying angle. It allows the forearm and hand to swing freely or to carry an object without hitting the
hip. The carrying angle is larger in females to accommodate their wider pelvis.
Radius
The radius runs parallel to the ulna, on the lateral (thumb) side of the forearm (see Figure 8.6). The head of the
radius is a disc-shaped structure that forms the proximal end. The small depression on the surface of the head
articulates with the capitulum of the humerus as part of the elbow joint, whereas the smooth, outer margin of the
head articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at the proximal radioulnar joint. The neck of the radius is the
narrowed region immediately below the expanded head. Inferior to this point on the medial side is the radial
tuberosity, an oval-shaped, bony protuberance that serves as a muscle attachment point. The shaft of the radius is
slightly curved and has a small ridge along its medial side. This ridge forms the interosseous border of the radius,
which, like the similar border of the ulna, is the line of attachment for the interosseous membrane that unites the
two forearm bones. The distal end of the radius has a smooth surface for articulation with two carpal bones to form
the radiocarpal joint or wrist joint (Figure 8.7 and Figure 8.8). On the medial side of the distal radius is the ulnar
notch of the radius. This shallow depression articulates with the head of the ulna, which together form the distal
radioulnar joint. The lateral end of the radius has a pointed projection called the styloid process of the radius. This
provides attachment for ligaments that support the lateral side of the wrist joint. Compared to the styloid process of
the ulna, the styloid process of the radius projects more distally, thereby limiting the range of movement for lateral
deviations of the hand at the wrist joint.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/fractures) to see how fractures of the distal radius bone can affect the wrist
joint. Explain the problems that may occur if a fracture of the distal radius involves the joint surface of the
radiocarpal joint of the wrist.
Carpal Bones
The wrist and base of the hand are formed by a series of eight small carpal bones (see Figure 8.7). The carpal bones
are arranged in two rows, forming a proximal row of four carpal bones and a distal row of four carpal bones. The
bones in the proximal row, running from the lateral (thumb) side to the medial side, are the scaphoid (“boat-
shaped”), lunate (“moon-shaped”), triquetrum (“three-cornered”), and pisiform (“pea-shaped”) bones. The small,
rounded pisiform bone articulates with the anterior surface of the triquetrum bone. The pisiform thus projects
anteriorly, where it forms the bony bump that can be felt at the medial base of your hand. The distal bones (lateral to
medial) are the trapezium (“table”), trapezoid (“resembles a table”), capitate (“head-shaped”), and hamate
(“hooked bone”) bones. The hamate bone is characterized by a prominent bony extension on its anterior side called
the hook of the hamate bone.
A helpful mnemonic for remembering the arrangement of the carpal bones is “So Long To Pinky, Here Comes The
Thumb.” This mnemonic starts on the lateral side and names the proximal bones from lateral to medial (scaphoid,
lunate, triquetrum, pisiform), then makes a U-turn to name the distal bones from medial to lateral (hamate, capitate,
trapezoid, trapezium). Thus, it starts and finishes on the lateral side.
280
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 8.7
Bones of the Wrist and Hand
The eight carpal bones form the base of the hand. These are arranged into proximal and
distal rows of four bones each. The metacarpal bones form the palm of the hand. The thumb and fingers consist of the phalanx bones.
The carpal bones form the base of the hand. This can be seen in the radiograph (X-ray image) of the hand that shows
the relationships of the hand bones to the skin creases of the hand (see Figure 8.8). Within the carpal bones, the
four proximal bones are united to each other by ligaments to form a unit. Only three of these bones, the scaphoid,
lunate, and triquetrum, contribute to the radiocarpal joint. The scaphoid and lunate bones articulate directly with
the distal end of the radius, whereas the triquetrum bone articulates with a fibrocartilaginous pad that spans the
radius and styloid process of the ulna. The distal end of the ulna thus does not directly articulate with any of the
carpal bones.
The four distal carpal bones are also held together as a group by ligaments. The proximal and distal rows of carpal
bones articulate with each other to form the midcarpal joint (see Figure 8.8). Together, the radiocarpal and
midcarpal joints are responsible for all movements of the hand at the wrist. The distal carpal bones also articulate
with the metacarpal bones of the hand.
8.2 • Bones of the Upper Limb
281
FIGURE 8.8
Bones of the Hand
This radiograph shows the position of the bones within the hand. Note the carpal bones that form the
base of the hand. (credit: modification of work by Trace Meek)
In the articulated hand, the carpal bones form a U-shaped grouping. A strong ligament called the flexor
retinaculum spans the top of this U-shaped area to maintain this grouping of the carpal bones. The flexor
retinaculum is attached laterally to the trapezium and scaphoid bones, and medially to the hamate and pisiform
bones. Together, the carpal bones and the flexor retinaculum form a passageway called the carpal tunnel, with the
carpal bones forming the walls and floor, and the flexor retinaculum forming the roof of this space (Figure 8.9). The
tendons of nine muscles of the anterior forearm and an important nerve pass through this narrow tunnel to enter the
hand. Overuse of the muscle tendons or wrist injury can produce inflammation and swelling within this space. This
produces compression of the nerve, resulting in carpal tunnel syndrome, which is characterized by pain or
numbness, and muscle weakness in those areas of the hand supplied by this nerve.
FIGURE 8.9
Carpal Tunnel
The carpal tunnel is the passageway by which nine muscle tendons and a major nerve enter the hand from
the anterior forearm. The walls and floor of the carpal tunnel are formed by the U-shaped grouping of the carpal bones, and the roof is
formed by the flexor retinaculum, a strong ligament that anteriorly unites the bones.
Metacarpal Bones
The palm of the hand contains five elongated metacarpal bones. These bones lie between the carpal bones of the
wrist and the bones of the fingers and thumb (see Figure 8.7). The proximal end of each metacarpal bone articulates
with one of the distal carpal bones. Each of these articulations is a carpometacarpal joint (see Figure 8.8). The
expanded distal end of each metacarpal bone articulates at the metacarpophalangeal joint with the proximal
282
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
phalanx bone of the thumb or one of the fingers. The distal end also forms the knuckles of the hand, at the base of
the fingers. The metacarpal bones are numbered 1–5, beginning at the thumb.
The first metacarpal bone, at the base of the thumb, is separated from the other metacarpal bones. This allows it a
freedom of motion that is independent of the other metacarpal bones, which is very important for thumb mobility.
The remaining metacarpal bones are united together to form the palm of the hand. The second and third metacarpal
bones are firmly anchored in place and are immobile. However, the fourth and fifth metacarpal bones have limited
anterior-posterior mobility, a motion that is greater for the fifth bone. This mobility is important during power
gripping with the hand (Figure 8.10). The anterior movement of these bones, particularly the fifth metacarpal bone,
increases the strength of contact for the medial hand during gripping actions.
FIGURE 8.10
Hand During Gripping
During tight gripping—compare (b) to (a)—the fourth and, particularly, the fifth metatarsal bones
are pulled anteriorly. This increases the contact between the object and the medial side of the hand, thus improving the firmness of the
grip.
Phalanx Bones
The fingers and thumb contain 14 bones, each of which is called a phalanx bone (plural = phalanges), named after
the ancient Greek phalanx (a rectangular block of soldiers). The thumb (pollex) is digit number 1 and has two
phalanges, a proximal phalanx, and a distal phalanx bone (see Figure 8.7). Digits 2 (index finger) through 5 (little
finger) have three phalanges each, called the proximal, middle, and distal phalanx bones. An interphalangeal joint
is one of the articulations between adjacent phalanges of the digits (see Figure 8.8).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/handbone) to explore the bones and joints of the hand.
Disorders of the...
Appendicular System: Fractures of Upper Limb Bones
Due to our constant use of the hands and the rest of our upper limbs, an injury to any of these areas will cause a
significant loss of functional ability. Many fractures result from a hard fall onto an outstretched hand. The
resulting transmission of force up the limb may result in a fracture of the humerus, radius, or scaphoid bones.
These injuries are especially common in elderly people whose bones are weakened due to osteoporosis.
Falls onto the hand or elbow, or direct blows to the arm, can result in fractures of the humerus (Figure 8.11).
Following a fall, fractures at the surgical neck, the region at which the expanded proximal end of the humerus
joins with the shaft, can result in an impacted fracture, in which the distal portion of the humerus is driven into
the proximal portion. Falls or blows to the arm can also produce transverse or spiral fractures of the humeral
shaft.
In children, a fall onto the tip of the elbow frequently results in a distal humerus fracture. In these, the olecranon
of the ulna is driven upward, resulting in a fracture across the distal humerus, above both epicondyles
(supracondylar fracture), or a fracture between the epicondyles, thus separating one or both of the epicondyles
from the body of the humerus (intercondylar fracture). With these injuries, the immediate concern is possible
compression of the artery to the forearm due to swelling of the surrounding tissues. If compression occurs, the
resulting ischemia (lack of oxygen) due to reduced blood flow can quickly produce irreparable damage to the
8.2 • Bones of the Upper Limb
283
FIGURE 8.11
Fractures of the Humerus and Radius
Falls or direct blows can result in fractures of the surgical neck or shaft of the
humerus. Falls onto the elbow can fracture the distal humerus. A Colles fracture of the distal radius is the most common forearm fracture.
forearm muscles. In addition, four major nerves for shoulder and upper limb muscles are closely associated with
different regions of the humerus, and thus, humeral fractures may also damage these nerves.
Another frequent injury following a fall onto an outstretched hand is a Colles fracture (“col-lees”) of the distal
radius (see Figure 8.11). This involves a complete transverse fracture across the distal radius that drives the
separated distal fragment of the radius posteriorly and superiorly. This injury results in a characteristic “dinner
fork” bend of the forearm just above the wrist due to the posterior displacement of the hand. This is the most
frequent forearm fracture and is a common injury in persons over the age of 50, particularly in older people with
osteoporosis. It also commonly occurs following a high-speed fall onto the hand during activities such as
snowboarding or skating.
The most commonly fractured carpal bone is the scaphoid, often resulting from a fall onto the hand. Deep pain
at the lateral wrist may yield an initial diagnosis of a wrist sprain, but a radiograph taken several weeks after the
injury, after tissue swelling has subsided, will reveal the fracture. Due to the poor blood supply to the scaphoid
bone, healing will be slow and there is the danger of bone necrosis and subsequent degenerative joint disease of
the wrist.
284
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/colles) to learn about a Colles fracture, a break of the distal radius, usually
caused by falling onto an outstretched hand. When would surgery be required and how would the fracture be
repaired in this case?
8.3 The Pelvic Girdle and Pelvis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define the pelvic girdle and describe the bones and ligaments of the pelvis
•
Explain the three regions of the hip bone and identify their bony landmarks
•
Describe the openings of the pelvis and the boundaries of the greater and lesser pelvis
The pelvic girdle (hip girdle) is formed by a single bone, the hip bone or coxal bone (coxal = “hip”), which serves as
the attachment point for each lower limb. Each hip bone, in turn, is firmly joined to the axial skeleton via its
attachment to the sacrum of the vertebral column. The right and left hip bones also converge anteriorly to attach to
each other. The bony pelvis is the entire structure formed by the two hip bones, the sacrum, and, attached inferiorly
to the sacrum, the coccyx (Figure 8.12).
Unlike the bones of the pectoral girdle, which are highly mobile to enhance the range of upper limb movements, the
bones of the pelvis are strongly united to each other to form a largely immobile, weight-bearing structure. This is
important for stability because it enables the weight of the body to be easily transferred laterally from the vertebral
column, through the pelvic girdle and hip joints, and into either lower limb whenever the other limb is not bearing
weight. Thus, the immobility of the pelvis provides a strong foundation for the upper body as it rests on top of the
mobile lower limbs.
FIGURE 8.12
Pelvis
The pelvic girdle is formed by a single hip bone. The hip bone attaches the lower limb to the axial skeleton through
its articulation with the sacrum. The right and left hip bones, plus the sacrum and the coccyx, together form the pelvis.
Hip Bone
The hip bone, or coxal bone, forms the pelvic girdle portion of the pelvis. The paired hip bones are the large, curved
bones that form the lateral and anterior aspects of the pelvis. Each adult hip bone is formed by three separate bones
that fuse together during the late teenage years. These bony components are the ilium, ischium, and pubis (Figure
8.13). These names are retained and used to define the three regions of the adult hip bone.
8.3 • The Pelvic Girdle and Pelvis
285
FIGURE 8.13
The Hip Bone
The adult hip bone consists of three regions. The ilium forms the large, fan-shaped superior portion, the
ischium forms the posteroinferior portion, and the pubis forms the anteromedial portion.
The ilium is the fan-like, superior region that forms the largest part of the hip bone. It is firmly united to the sacrum
at the largely immobile sacroiliac joint (see Figure 8.12). The ischium forms the posteroinferior region of each hip
bone. It supports the body when sitting. The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone. The pubis curves
medially, where it joins to the pubis of the opposite hip bone at a specialized joint called the pubic symphysis.
Ilium
When you place your hands on your waist, you can feel the arching, superior margin of the ilium along your waistline
(see Figure 8.13). This curved, superior margin of the ilium is the iliac crest. The rounded, anterior termination of
the iliac crest is the anterior superior iliac spine. This important bony landmark can be felt at your anterolateral hip.
Inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine is a rounded protuberance called the anterior inferior iliac spine. Both of
these iliac spines serve as attachment points for muscles of the thigh. Posteriorly, the iliac crest curves downward to
terminate as the posterior superior iliac spine. Muscles and ligaments surround but do not cover this bony
landmark, thus sometimes producing a depression seen as a “dimple” located on the lower back. More inferiorly is
the posterior inferior iliac spine. This is located at the inferior end of a large, roughened area called the auricular
surface of the ilium. The auricular surface articulates with the auricular surface of the sacrum to form the sacroiliac
joint. Both the posterior superior and posterior inferior iliac spines serve as attachment points for the muscles and
very strong ligaments that support the sacroiliac joint.
The shallow depression located on the anteromedial (internal) surface of the upper ilium is called the iliac fossa.
The inferior margin of this space is formed by the arcuate line of the ilium, the ridge formed by the pronounced
change in curvature between the upper and lower portions of the ilium. The large, inverted U-shaped indentation
located on the posterior margin of the lower ilium is called the greater sciatic notch.
Ischium
The ischium forms the posterolateral portion of the hip bone (see Figure 8.13). The large, roughened area of the
inferior ischium is the ischial tuberosity. This serves as the attachment for the posterior thigh muscles and also
carries the weight of the body when sitting. You can feel the ischial tuberosity if you wiggle your pelvis against the
seat of a chair. Projecting superiorly and anteriorly from the ischial tuberosity is a narrow segment of bone called the
ischial ramus. The slightly curved posterior margin of the ischium above the ischial tuberosity is the lesser sciatic
notch. The bony projection separating the lesser sciatic notch and greater sciatic notch is the ischial spine.
286
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
Pubis
The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone (see Figure 8.13). The enlarged medial portion of the pubis is
the pubic body. Located superiorly on the pubic body is a small bump called the pubic tubercle. The superior
pubic ramus is the segment of bone that passes laterally from the pubic body to join the ilium. The narrow ridge
running along the superior margin of the superior pubic ramus is the pectineal line of the pubis.
The pubic body is joined to the pubic body of the opposite hip bone by the pubic symphysis. Extending downward
and laterally from the body is the inferior pubic ramus. The pubic arch is the bony structure formed by the pubic
symphysis, and the bodies and inferior pubic rami of the adjacent pubic bones. The inferior pubic ramus extends
downward to join the ischial ramus. Together, these form the single ischiopubic ramus, which extends from the
pubic body to the ischial tuberosity. The inverted V-shape formed as the ischiopubic rami from both sides come
together at the pubic symphysis is called the subpubic angle.
Pelvis
The pelvis consists of four bones: the right and left hip bones, the sacrum, and the coccyx (see Figure 8.12). The
pelvis has several important functions. Its primary role is to support the weight of the upper body when sitting and
to transfer this weight to the lower limbs when standing. It serves as an attachment point for trunk and lower limb
muscles, and also protects the internal pelvic organs. When standing in the anatomical position, the pelvis is tilted
anteriorly. In this position, the anterior superior iliac spines and the pubic tubercles lie in the same vertical plane,
and the anterior (internal) surface of the sacrum faces forward and downward.
The three areas of each hip bone, the ilium, pubis, and ischium, converge centrally to form a deep, cup-shaped
cavity called the acetabulum. This is located on the lateral side of the hip bone and is part of the hip joint. The large
opening in the anteroinferior hip bone between the ischium and pubis is the obturator foramen. This space is
largely filled in by a layer of connective tissue and serves for the attachment of muscles on both its internal and
external surfaces.
Several ligaments unite the bones of the pelvis (Figure 8.14). The largely immobile sacroiliac joint is supported by a
pair of strong ligaments that are attached between the sacrum and ilium portions of the hip bone. These are the
anterior sacroiliac ligament on the anterior side of the joint and the posterior sacroiliac ligament on the posterior
side. Also spanning the sacrum and hip bone are two additional ligaments. The sacrospinous ligament runs from
the sacrum to the ischial spine, and the sacrotuberous ligament runs from the sacrum to the ischial tuberosity.
These ligaments help to support and immobilize the sacrum as it carries the weight of the body.
FIGURE 8.14
Ligaments of the Pelvis
The posterior sacroiliac ligament supports the sacroiliac joint. The sacrospinous ligament spans
the sacrum to the ischial spine, and the sacrotuberous ligament spans the sacrum to the ischial tuberosity. The sacrospinous and
sacrotuberous ligaments contribute to the formation of the greater and lesser sciatic foramina.
8.3 • The Pelvic Girdle and Pelvis
287
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/3Dpelvis) for a 3-D view of the pelvis and its associated ligaments. What is
the large opening in the bony pelvis, located between the ischium and pubic regions, and what two parts of the
pubis contribute to the formation of this opening?
The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments also help to define two openings on the posterolateral sides of the
pelvis through which muscles, nerves, and blood vessels for the lower limb exit. The superior opening is the greater
sciatic foramen. This large opening is formed by the greater sciatic notch of the hip bone, the sacrum, and the
sacrospinous ligament. The smaller, more inferior lesser sciatic foramen is formed by the lesser sciatic notch of the
hip bone, together with the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments.
The space enclosed by the bony pelvis is divided into two regions (Figure 8.15). The broad, superior region, defined
laterally by the large, fan-like portion of the upper hip bone, is called the greater pelvis (greater pelvic cavity; false
pelvis). This broad area is occupied by portions of the small and large intestines, and because it is more closely
associated with the abdominal cavity, it is sometimes referred to as the false pelvis. More inferiorly, the narrow,
rounded space of the lesser pelvis (lesser pelvic cavity; true pelvis) contains the bladder and other pelvic organs,
and thus is also known as the true pelvis. The pelvic brim (also known as the pelvic inlet) forms the superior margin
of the lesser pelvis, separating it from the greater pelvis. The pelvic brim is defined by a line formed by the upper
margin of the pubic symphysis anteriorly, and the pectineal line of the pubis, the arcuate line of the ilium, and the
sacral promontory (the anterior margin of the superior sacrum) posteriorly. The inferior limit of the lesser pelvic
cavity is called the pelvic outlet. This large opening is defined by the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis
anteriorly, and the ischiopubic ramus, the ischial tuberosity, the sacrotuberous ligament, and the inferior tip of the
coccyx posteriorly. Because of the anterior tilt of the pelvis, the lesser pelvis is also angled, giving it an
anterosuperior (pelvic inlet) to posteroinferior (pelvic outlet) orientation.
FIGURE 8.15
Male and Female Pelvis
The female pelvis is adapted for childbirth and is broader, with a larger subpubic angle, a
rounder pelvic brim, and a wider and more shallow lesser pelvic cavity than the male pelvis.
Comparison of the Female and Male Pelvis
The differences between the adult female and male pelvis relate to function and body size. In general, the bones of
the male pelvis are thicker and heavier, adapted for support of the male’s heavier physical build and stronger
muscles. The greater sciatic notch of the male hip bone is narrower and deeper than the broader notch of females.
Because the female pelvis is adapted for childbirth, it is wider than the male pelvis, as evidenced by the distance
between the anterior superior iliac spines (see Figure 8.15). The ischial tuberosities of females are also farther
apart, which increases the size of the pelvic outlet. Because of this increased pelvic width, the subpubic angle is
larger in females (greater than 80 degrees) than it is in males (less than 70 degrees). The female sacrum is wider,
shorter, and less curved, and the sacral promontory projects less into the pelvic cavity, thus giving the female pelvic
inlet (pelvic brim) a more rounded or oval shape compared to males. The lesser pelvic cavity of females is also wider
and more shallow than the narrower, deeper, and tapering lesser pelvis of males. Because of the obvious differences
between female and male hip bones, this is the one bone of the body that allows for the most accurate sex
determination. Table 8.1 provides an overview of the general differences between the female and male pelvis.
288
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
Overview of Differences between the Female and Male Pelvis
Female pelvis
Male pelvis
Pelvic weight
Bones of the pelvis are lighter and
thinner
Bones of the pelvis are thicker and
heavier
Pelvic inlet shape
Pelvic inlet has a round or oval shape
Pelvic inlet is heart-shaped
Lesser pelvic cavity
shape
Lesser pelvic cavity is shorter and wider
Lesser pelvic cavity is longer and
narrower
Subpubic angle
Subpubic angle is greater than 80
degrees
Subpubic angle is less than 70 degrees
Pelvic outlet shape
Pelvic outlet is rounded and larger
Pelvic outlet is smaller
TABLE 8.1
CAREER CONNECTION
Forensic Pathology and Forensic Anthropology
A forensic pathologist (also known as a medical examiner) is a medically trained physician who has been specifically
trained in pathology to examine the bodies of the deceased to determine the cause of death. A forensic pathologist
applies understanding of disease as well as toxins, blood and DNA analysis, firearms and ballistics, and other factors
to assess the cause and manner of death. At times, a forensic pathologist will be called to testify under oath in
situations that involve a possible crime. Forensic pathology is a field that has received much media attention on
television shows or following a high-profile death.
While forensic pathologists are responsible for determining whether the cause of someone’s death was natural, by
suicide, accidental, or by homicide, there are times when uncovering the cause of death is more complex, and other
skills are needed. Forensic anthropology brings the tools and knowledge of physical anthropology and human
osteology (the study of the skeleton) to the task of investigating a death. A forensic anthropologist assists medical
and legal professionals in identifying human remains. The science behind forensic anthropology involves the study
of archaeological excavation; the examination of hair; an understanding of plants, insects, and footprints; the ability
to determine how much time has elapsed since the person died; the analysis of past medical history and toxicology;
the ability to determine whether there are any postmortem injuries or alterations of the skeleton; and the
identification of the decedent (deceased person) using skeletal and dental evidence.
Due to the extensive knowledge and understanding of excavation techniques, a forensic anthropologist is an integral
and invaluable team member to have on-site when investigating a crime scene, especially when the recovery of
human skeletal remains is involved. When remains are bought to a forensic anthropologist for examination, they
must first determine whether the remains are in fact human. Once the remains have been identified as belonging to
a person and not to an animal, the next step is to approximate the individual’s age, sex, race, and height. The
forensic anthropologist does not determine the cause of death, but rather provides information to the forensic
pathologist, who will use all of the data collected to make a final determination regarding the cause of death.
8.4 Bones of the Lower Limb
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the divisions of the lower limb and describe the bones of each region
•
Describe the bones and bony landmarks that articulate at each joint of the lower limb
8.4 • Bones of the Lower Limb
289
Like the upper limb, the lower limb is divided into three regions. The thigh is that portion of the lower limb located
between the hip joint and knee joint. The leg is specifically the region between the knee joint and the ankle joint.
Distal to the ankle is the foot. The lower limb contains 30 bones. These are the femur, patella, tibia, fibula, tarsal
bones, metatarsal bones, and phalanges (see Figure 8.2). The femur is the single bone of the thigh. The patella is
the kneecap and articulates with the distal femur. The tibia is the larger, weight-bearing bone located on the medial
side of the leg, and the fibula is the thin bone of the lateral leg. The bones of the foot are divided into three groups.
The posterior portion of the foot is formed by a group of seven bones, each of which is known as a tarsal bone,
whereas the mid-foot contains five elongated bones, each of which is a metatarsal bone. The toes contain 14 small
bones, each of which is a phalanx bone of the foot.
Femur
The femur, or thigh bone, is the single bone of the thigh region (Figure 8.16). It is the longest and strongest bone of
the body, and accounts for approximately one-quarter of a person’s total height. The rounded, proximal end is the
head of the femur, which articulates with the acetabulum of the hip bone to form the hip joint. The fovea capitis is
a minor indentation on the medial side of the femoral head that serves as the site of attachment for the ligament of
the head of the femur. This ligament spans the femur and acetabulum, but is weak and provides little support for
the hip joint. It does, however, carry an important artery that supplies the head of the femur.
290
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 8.16
Femur and Patella
The femur is the single bone of the thigh region. It articulates superiorly with the hip bone at the hip
joint, and inferiorly with the tibia at the knee joint. The patella only articulates with the distal end of the femur.
The narrowed region below the head is the neck of the femur. This is a common area for fractures of the femur. The
greater trochanter is the large, upward, bony projection located above the base of the neck. Multiple muscles that
act across the hip joint attach to the greater trochanter, which, because of its projection from the femur, gives
additional leverage to these muscles. The greater trochanter can be felt just under the skin on the lateral side of
your upper thigh. The lesser trochanter is a small, bony prominence that lies on the medial aspect of the femur, just
below the neck. A single, powerful muscle attaches to the lesser trochanter. Running between the greater and lesser
trochanters on the anterior side of the femur is the roughened intertrochanteric line. The trochanters are also
connected on the posterior side of the femur by the larger intertrochanteric crest.
The elongated shaft of the femur has a slight anterior bowing or curvature. At its proximal end, the posterior shaft
has the gluteal tuberosity, a roughened area extending inferiorly from the greater trochanter. More inferiorly, the
gluteal tuberosity becomes continuous with the linea aspera (“rough line”). This is the roughened ridge that passes
distally along the posterior side of the mid-femur. Multiple muscles of the hip and thigh regions make long, thin
attachments to the femur along the linea aspera.
The distal end of the femur has medial and lateral bony expansions. On the lateral side, the smooth portion that
covers the distal and posterior aspects of the lateral expansion is the lateral condyle of the femur. The roughened
8.4 • Bones of the Lower Limb
291
area on the outer, lateral side of the condyle is the lateral epicondyle of the femur. Similarly, the smooth region of
the distal and posterior medial femur is the medial condyle of the femur, and the irregular outer, medial side of this
is the medial epicondyle of the femur. The lateral and medial condyles articulate with the tibia to form the knee
joint. The epicondyles provide attachment for muscles and supporting ligaments of the knee. The adductor tubercle
is a small bump located at the superior margin of the medial epicondyle. Posteriorly, the medial and lateral condyles
are separated by a deep depression called the intercondylar fossa. Anteriorly, the smooth surfaces of the condyles
join together to form a wide groove called the patellar surface, which provides for articulation with the patella bone.
The combination of the medial and lateral condyles with the patellar surface gives the distal end of the femur a
horseshoe (U) shape.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/midfemur) to view how a fracture of the mid-femur is surgically repaired.
How are the two portions of the broken femur stabilized during surgical repair of a fractured femur?
Patella
The patella (kneecap) is largest sesamoid bone of the body (see Figure 8.16). A sesamoid bone is a bone that is
incorporated into the tendon of a muscle where that tendon crosses a joint. The sesamoid bone articulates with the
underlying bones to prevent damage to the muscle tendon due to rubbing against the bones during movements of
the joint. The patella is found in the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle, the large muscle of the anterior thigh
that passes across the anterior knee to attach to the tibia. The patella articulates with the patellar surface of the
femur and thus prevents rubbing of the muscle tendon against the distal femur. The patella also lifts the tendon
away from the knee joint, which increases the leverage power of the quadriceps femoris muscle as it acts across the
knee. The patella does not articulate with the tibia.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/kneesurgery) to watch a virtual knee replacement surgery. The prosthetic knee
components must be properly aligned to function properly. How is this alignment ensured?
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Runner’s Knee
Runner’s knee, also known as patellofemoral syndrome, is the most common overuse injury among runners. It is
most frequent in adolescents and young adults, and is more common in females. It often results from excessive
running, particularly downhill, but may also occur in athletes who do a lot of knee bending, such as jumpers, skiers,
cyclists, weight lifters, and soccer players. It is felt as a dull, aching pain around the front of the knee and deep to
the patella. The pain may be felt when walking or running, going up or down stairs, kneeling or squatting, or after
sitting with the knee bent for an extended period.
Patellofemoral syndrome may be initiated by a variety of causes, including individual variations in the shape and
movement of the patella, a direct blow to the patella, or flat feet or improper shoes that cause excessive turning in
or out of the feet or leg. These factors may cause in an imbalance in the muscle pull that acts on the patella,
resulting in an abnormal tracking of the patella that allows it to deviate too far toward the lateral side of the patellar
surface on the distal femur.
Because the hips are wider than the knee region, the femur has a diagonal orientation within the thigh, in contrast to
the vertically oriented tibia of the leg (Figure 8.17). The Q-angle is a measure of how far the femur is angled laterally
away from vertical. The Q-angle is normally 10–15 degrees, with females typically having a larger Q-angle due to
their wider pelvis. During extension of the knee, the quadriceps femoris muscle pulls the patella both superiorly and
laterally, with the lateral pull greater in females due to their large Q-angle. This makes females more vulnerable to
developing patellofemoral syndrome than males. Normally, the large lip on the lateral side of the patellar surface of
the femur compensates for the lateral pull on the patella, and thus helps to maintain its proper tracking.
292
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
However, if the pull produced by the medial and lateral sides of the quadriceps femoris muscle is not properly
balanced, abnormal tracking of the patella toward the lateral side may occur. With continued use, this produces pain
and could result in damage to the articulating surfaces of the patella and femur, and the possible future
development of arthritis. Treatment generally involves stopping the activity that produces knee pain for a period of
time, followed by a gradual resumption of activity. Proper strengthening of the quadriceps femoris muscle to correct
for imbalances is also important to help prevent reoccurrence.
FIGURE 8.17
The Q-Angle
The Q-angle is a measure of the amount of lateral deviation of the femur from the vertical line of the tibia.
Adult females have a larger Q-angle due to their wider pelvis than adult males.
Tibia
The tibia (shin bone) is the medial bone of the leg and is larger than the fibula, with which it is paired (Figure 8.18).
The tibia is the main weight-bearing bone of the lower leg and the second longest bone of the body, after the femur.
The medial side of the tibia is located immediately under the skin, allowing it to be easily palpated down the entire
length of the medial leg.
8.4 • Bones of the Lower Limb
293
FIGURE 8.18
Tibia and Fibula
The tibia is the larger, weight-bearing bone located on the medial side of the leg. The fibula is the
slender bone of the lateral side of the leg and does not bear weight.
The proximal end of the tibia is greatly expanded. The two sides of this expansion form the medial condyle of the
tibia and the lateral condyle of the tibia. The tibia does not have epicondyles. The top surface of each condyle is
smooth and flattened. These areas articulate with the medial and lateral condyles of the femur to form the knee
joint. Between the articulating surfaces of the tibial condyles is the intercondylar eminence, an irregular, elevated
area that serves as the inferior attachment point for two supporting ligaments of the knee.
The tibial tuberosity is an elevated area on the anterior side of the tibia, near its proximal end. It is the final site of
attachment for the muscle tendon associated with the patella. More inferiorly, the shaft of the tibia becomes
triangular in shape.
The anterior apex of this triangle forms the anterior border of the tibia, which begins at the tibial tuberosity and
runs inferiorly along the length of the tibia. Both the anterior border and the medial side of the triangular shaft are
located immediately under the skin and can be easily palpated along the entire length of the tibia. A small ridge
running down the lateral side of the tibial shaft is the interosseous border of the tibia. This is for the attachment of
the interosseous membrane of the leg, the sheet of dense connective tissue that unites the tibia and fibula bones.
Located on the posterior side of the tibia is the soleal line, a diagonally running, roughened ridge that begins below
the base of the lateral condyle, and runs down and medially across the proximal third of the posterior tibia. Muscles
of the posterior leg attach to this line.
The large expansion found on the medial side of the distal tibia is the medial malleolus (“little hammer”). This
forms the large bony bump found on the medial side of the ankle region. Both the smooth surface on the inside of
the medial malleolus and the smooth area at the distal end of the tibia articulate with the talus bone of the foot as
part of the ankle joint. On the lateral side of the distal tibia is a wide groove called the fibular notch. This area
294
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
articulates with the distal end of the fibula, forming the distal tibiofibular joint.
Fibula
The fibula is the slender bone located on the lateral side of the leg (see Figure 8.18). The fibula does not bear
weight. It serves primarily for muscle attachments and thus is largely surrounded by muscles. Only the proximal and
distal ends of the fibula can be palpated.
The head of the fibula is the small, knob-like, proximal end of the fibula. It articulates with the inferior aspect of the
lateral tibial condyle, forming the proximal tibiofibular joint. The thin shaft of the fibula has the interosseous
border of the fibula, a narrow ridge running down its medial side for the attachment of the interosseous membrane
that spans the fibula and tibia. The distal end of the fibula forms the lateral malleolus, which forms the easily
palpated bony bump on the lateral side of the ankle. The deep (medial) side of the lateral malleolus articulates with
the talus bone of the foot as part of the ankle joint. The distal fibula also articulates with the fibular notch of the
tibia.
Tarsal Bones
The posterior half of the foot is formed by seven tarsal bones (Figure 8.19). The most superior bone is the talus. This
has a relatively square-shaped, upper surface that articulates with the tibia and fibula to form the ankle joint. Three
areas of articulation form the ankle joint: The superomedial surface of the talus bone articulates with the medial
malleolus of the tibia, the top of the talus articulates with the distal end of the tibia, and the lateral side of the talus
articulates with the lateral malleolus of the fibula. Inferiorly, the talus articulates with the calcaneus (heel bone),
the largest bone of the foot, which forms the heel. Body weight is transferred from the tibia to the talus to the
calcaneus, which rests on the ground. The medial calcaneus has a prominent bony extension called the
sustentaculum tali (“support for the talus”) that supports the medial side of the talus bone.
FIGURE 8.19
Bones of the Foot
The bones of the foot are divided into three groups. The posterior foot is formed by the seven tarsal
bones. The mid-foot has the five metatarsal bones. The toes contain the phalanges.
The cuboid bone articulates with the anterior end of the calcaneus bone. The cuboid has a deep groove running
8.4 • Bones of the Lower Limb
295
across its inferior surface, which provides passage for a muscle tendon. The talus bone articulates anteriorly with
the navicular bone, which in turn articulates anteriorly with the three cuneiform (“wedge-shaped”) bones. These
bones are the medial cuneiform, the intermediate cuneiform, and the lateral cuneiform. Each of these bones has
a broad superior surface and a narrow inferior surface, which together produce the transverse (medial-lateral)
curvature of the foot. The navicular and lateral cuneiform bones also articulate with the medial side of the cuboid
bone.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Use this tutorial (http://openstax.org/l/footbones) to review the bones of the foot. Which tarsal bones are in the
proximal, intermediate, and distal groups?
Metatarsal Bones
The anterior half of the foot is formed by the five metatarsal bones, which are located between the tarsal bones of
the posterior foot and the phalanges of the toes (see Figure 8.19). These elongated bones are numbered 1–5,
starting with the medial side of the foot. The first metatarsal bone is shorter and thicker than the others. The second
metatarsal is the longest. The base of the metatarsal bone is the proximal end of each metatarsal bone. These
articulate with the cuboid or cuneiform bones. The base of the fifth metatarsal has a large, lateral expansion that
provides for muscle attachments. This expanded base of the fifth metatarsal can be felt as a bony bump at the
midpoint along the lateral border of the foot. The expanded distal end of each metatarsal is the head of the
metatarsal bone. Each metatarsal bone articulates with the proximal phalanx of a toe to form a
metatarsophalangeal joint. The heads of the metatarsal bones also rest on the ground and form the ball (anterior
end) of the foot.
Phalanges
The toes contain a total of 14 phalanx bones (phalanges), arranged in a similar manner as the phalanges of the
fingers (see Figure 8.19). The toes are numbered 1–5, starting with the big toe (hallux). The big toe has two phalanx
bones, the proximal and distal phalanges. The remaining toes all have proximal, middle, and distal phalanges. A joint
between adjacent phalanx bones is called an interphalangeal joint.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this link (http://openstax.org/l/bunion) to learn about a bunion, a localized swelling on the medial side of the
foot, next to the first metatarsophalangeal joint, at the base of the big toe. What is a bunion and what type of shoe is
most likely to cause this to develop?
Arches of the Foot
When the foot comes into contact with the ground during walking, running, or jumping activities, the impact of the
body weight puts a tremendous amount of pressure and force on the foot. During running, the force applied to each
foot as it contacts the ground can be up to 2.5 times your body weight. The bones, joints, ligaments, and muscles of
the foot absorb this force, thus greatly reducing the amount of shock that is passed superiorly into the lower limb
and body. The arches of the foot play an important role in this shock-absorbing ability. When weight is applied to the
foot, these arches will flatten somewhat, thus absorbing energy. When the weight is removed, the arch rebounds,
giving “spring” to the step. The arches also serve to distribute body weight side to side and to either end of the foot.
The foot has a transverse arch, a medial longitudinal arch, and a lateral longitudinal arch (see Figure 8.19). The
transverse arch forms the medial-lateral curvature of the mid-foot. It is formed by the wedge shapes of the
cuneiform bones and bases (proximal ends) of the first to fourth metatarsal bones. This arch helps to distribute
body weight from side to side within the foot, thus allowing the foot to accommodate uneven terrain.
The longitudinal arches run down the length of the foot. The lateral longitudinal arch is relatively flat, whereas the
medial longitudinal arch is larger (taller). The longitudinal arches are formed by the tarsal bones posteriorly and the
metatarsal bones anteriorly. These arches are supported at either end, where they contact the ground. Posteriorly,
this support is provided by the calcaneus bone and anteriorly by the heads (distal ends) of the metatarsal bones.
The talus bone, which receives the weight of the body, is located at the top of the longitudinal arches. Body weight is
296
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
then conveyed from the talus to the ground by the anterior and posterior ends of these arches. Strong ligaments
unite the adjacent foot bones to prevent disruption of the arches during weight bearing. On the bottom of the foot,
additional ligaments tie together the anterior and posterior ends of the arches. These ligaments have elasticity,
which allows them to stretch somewhat during weight bearing, thus allowing the longitudinal arches to spread. The
stretching of these ligaments stores energy within the foot, rather than passing these forces into the leg. Contraction
of the foot muscles also plays an important role in this energy absorption. When the weight is removed, the elastic
ligaments recoil and pull the ends of the arches closer together. This recovery of the arches releases the stored
energy and improves the energy efficiency of walking.
Stretching of the ligaments that support the longitudinal arches can lead to pain. This can occur in overweight
individuals, with people who have jobs that involve standing for long periods of time (such as a waitress), or walking
or running long distances. If stretching of the ligaments is prolonged, excessive, or repeated, it can result in a
gradual lengthening of the supporting ligaments, with subsequent depression or collapse of the longitudinal arches,
particularly on the medial side of the foot. This condition is called pes planus (“flat foot” or “fallen arches”).
8.5 Development of the Appendicular Skeleton
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the growth and development of the embryonic limb buds
•
Discuss the appearance of primary and secondary ossification centers
Embryologically, the appendicular skeleton arises from mesenchyme, a type of embryonic tissue that can
differentiate into many types of tissues, including bone or muscle tissue. Mesenchyme gives rise to the bones of the
upper and lower limbs, as well as to the pectoral and pelvic girdles. Development of the limbs begins near the end of
the fourth embryonic week, with the upper limbs appearing first. Thereafter, the development of the upper and
lower limbs follows similar patterns, with the lower limbs lagging behind the upper limbs by a few days.
Limb Growth
Each upper and lower limb initially develops as a small bulge called a limb bud, which appears on the lateral side of
the early embryo. The upper limb bud appears near the end of the fourth week of development, with the lower limb
bud appearing shortly after (Figure 8.20).
FIGURE 8.20
Embryo at Seven Weeks
Limb buds are visible in an embryo at the end of the seventh week of development (embryo
derived from an ectopic pregnancy). (credit: Ed Uthman/flickr)
Initially, the limb buds consist of a core of mesenchyme covered by a layer of ectoderm. The ectoderm at the end of
the limb bud thickens to form a narrow crest called the apical ectodermal ridge. This ridge stimulates the
8.5 • Development of the Appendicular Skeleton
297
underlying mesenchyme to rapidly proliferate, producing the outgrowth of the developing limb. As the limb bud
elongates, cells located farther from the apical ectodermal ridge slow their rates of cell division and begin to
differentiate. In this way, the limb develops along a proximal-to-distal axis.
During the sixth week of development, the distal ends of the upper and lower limb buds expand and flatten into a
paddle shape. This region will become the hand or foot. The wrist or ankle areas then appear as a constriction that
develops at the base of the paddle. Shortly after this, a second constriction on the limb bud appears at the future
site of the elbow or knee. Within the paddle, areas of tissue undergo cell death, producing separations between the
growing fingers and toes. Also during the sixth week of development, mesenchyme within the limb buds begins to
differentiate into hyaline cartilage that will form models of the future limb bones.
The early outgrowth of the upper and lower limb buds initially has the limbs positioned so that the regions that will
become the palm of the hand or the bottom of the foot are facing medially toward the body, with the future thumb or
big toe both oriented toward the head. During the seventh week of development, the upper limb rotates laterally by
90 degrees, so that the palm of the hand faces anteriorly and the thumb points laterally. In contrast, the lower limb
undergoes a 90-degree medial rotation, thus bringing the big toe to the medial side of the foot.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/limbbuds) to follow the development and growth of the upper and lower
limb buds. On what days of embryonic development do these events occur: (a) first appearance of the upper limb
bud (limb ridge); (b) the flattening of the distal limb to form the handplate or footplate; and (c) the beginning of limb
rotation?
Ossification of Appendicular Bones
All of the girdle and limb bones, except for the clavicle, develop by the process of endochondral ossification. This
process begins as the mesenchyme within the limb bud differentiates into hyaline cartilage to form cartilage models
for future bones. By the twelfth week, a primary ossification center will have appeared in the diaphysis (shaft) region
of the long bones, initiating the process that converts the cartilage model into bone. A secondary ossification center
will appear in each epiphysis (expanded end) of these bones at a later time, usually after birth. The primary and
secondary ossification centers are separated by the epiphyseal plate, a layer of growing hyaline cartilage. This plate
is located between the diaphysis and each epiphysis. It continues to grow and is responsible for the lengthening of
the bone. The epiphyseal plate is retained for many years, until the bone reaches its final, adult size, at which time
the epiphyseal plate disappears and the epiphysis fuses to the diaphysis. (Seek additional content on ossification in
the chapter on bone tissue.)
Small bones, such as the phalanges, will develop only one secondary ossification center and will thus have only a
single epiphyseal plate. Large bones, such as the femur, will develop several secondary ossification centers, with an
epiphyseal plate associated with each secondary center. Thus, ossification of the femur begins at the end of the
seventh week with the appearance of the primary ossification center in the diaphysis, which rapidly expands to
ossify the shaft of the bone prior to birth. Secondary ossification centers develop at later times. Ossification of the
distal end of the femur, to form the condyles and epicondyles, begins shortly before birth. Secondary ossification
centers also appear in the femoral head late in the first year after birth, in the greater trochanter during the fourth
year, and in the lesser trochanter between the ages of 9 and 10 years. Once these areas have ossified, their fusion to
the diaphysis and the disappearance of each epiphyseal plate follow a reversed sequence. Thus, the lesser
trochanter is the first to fuse, doing so at the onset of puberty (around 11 years of age), followed by the greater
trochanter approximately 1 year later. The femoral head fuses between the ages of 14–17 years, whereas the distal
condyles of the femur are the last to fuse, between the ages of 16–19 years. Knowledge of the age at which different
epiphyseal plates disappear is important when interpreting radiographs taken of children. Since the cartilage of an
epiphyseal plate is less dense than bone, the plate will appear dark in a radiograph image. Thus, a normal
epiphyseal plate may be mistaken for a bone fracture.
The clavicle is the one appendicular skeleton bone that does not develop via endochondral ossification. Instead, the
clavicle develops through the process of intramembranous ossification. During this process, mesenchymal cells
differentiate directly into bone-producing cells, which produce the clavicle directly, without first making a cartilage
298
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
model. Because of this early production of bone, the clavicle is the first bone of the body to begin ossification, with
ossification centers appearing during the fifth week of development. However, ossification of the clavicle is not
complete until age 25.
Disorders of the...
Appendicular System: Congenital Clubfoot
Clubfoot, also known as talipes, is a congenital (present at birth) disorder of unknown cause and is the most
common deformity of the lower limb. It affects the foot and ankle, causing the foot to be twisted inward at a
sharp angle, like the head of a golf club (Figure 8.21). Clubfoot has a frequency of about 1 out of every 1,000
births, and is twice as likely to occur in a male child as in a female child. In 50 percent of cases, both feet are
affected.
FIGURE 8.21
Clubfoot
Clubfoot is a common deformity of the ankle and foot that is present at birth. Most cases are corrected
without surgery, and affected individuals will grow up to lead normal, active lives. (credit: James W. Hanson)
At birth, children with a clubfoot have the heel turned inward and the anterior foot twisted so that the lateral
side of the foot is facing inferiorly, commonly due to ligaments or leg muscles attached to the foot that are
shortened or abnormally tight. These pull the foot into an abnormal position, resulting in bone deformities. Other
symptoms may include bending of the ankle that lifts the heel of the foot and an extremely high foot arch. Due to
the limited range of motion in the affected foot, it is difficult to place the foot into the correct position.
Additionally, the affected foot may be shorter than normal, and the calf muscles are usually underdeveloped on
the affected side. Despite the appearance, this is not a painful condition for newborns. However, it must be
treated early to avoid future pain and impaired walking ability.
Although the cause of clubfoot is idiopathic (unknown), evidence indicates that fetal position within the uterus is
not a contributing factor. Genetic factors are involved, because clubfoot tends to run within families. Cigarette
smoking during pregnancy has been linked to the development of clubfoot, particularly in families with a history
of clubfoot.
Previously, clubfoot required extensive surgery. Today, 90 percent of cases are successfully treated without
surgery using new corrective casting techniques. The best chance for a full recovery requires that clubfoot
treatment begin during the first 2 weeks after birth. Corrective casting gently stretches the foot, which is
followed by the application of a holding cast to keep the foot in the proper position. This stretching and casting is
repeated weekly for several weeks. In severe cases, surgery may also be required, after which the foot typically
remains in a cast for 6 to 8 weeks. After the cast is removed following either surgical or nonsurgical treatment,
the child will be required to wear a brace part-time (at night) for up to 4 years. In addition, special exercises will
be prescribed, and the child must also wear special shoes. Close monitoring by the parents and adherence to
postoperative instructions are imperative in minimizing the risk of relapse.
8.5 • Development of the Appendicular Skeleton
299
Despite these difficulties, treatment for clubfoot is usually successful, and the child will grow up to lead a
normal, active life. Numerous examples of individuals born with a clubfoot who went on to successful careers
include Dudley Moore (comedian and actor), Damon Wayans (comedian and actor), Troy Aikman (three-time
Super Bowl-winning quarterback), Kristi Yamaguchi (Olympic gold medalist in figure skating), Mia Hamm (two-
time Olympic gold medalist in soccer), and Charles Woodson (Heisman trophy and Super Bowl winner).
300
8 • The Appendicular Skeleton
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
acetabulum
large, cup-shaped cavity located on the
lateral side of the hip bone; formed by the junction
of the ilium, pubis, and ischium portions of the hip
bone
acromial end of the clavicle
lateral end of the
clavicle that articulates with the acromion of the
scapula
acromial process
acromion of the scapula
acromioclavicular joint
articulation between the
acromion of the scapula and the acromial end of the
clavicle
acromion
flattened bony process that extends
laterally from the scapular spine to form the bony
tip of the shoulder
adductor tubercle
small, bony bump located on the
superior aspect of the medial epicondyle of the
femur
anatomical neck
line on the humerus located around
the outside margin of the humeral head
ankle joint
joint that separates the leg and foot
portions of the lower limb; formed by the
articulations between the talus bone of the foot
inferiorly, and the distal end of the tibia, medial
malleolus of the tibia, and lateral malleolus of the
fibula superiorly
anterior border of the tibia
narrow, anterior margin
of the tibia that extends inferiorly from the tibial
tuberosity
anterior inferior iliac spine
small, bony projection
located on the anterior margin of the ilium, below
the anterior superior iliac spine
anterior sacroiliac ligament
strong ligament
between the sacrum and the ilium portions of the
hip bone that supports the anterior side of the
sacroiliac joint
anterior superior iliac spine
rounded, anterior end of
the iliac crest
apical ectodermal ridge
enlarged ridge of ectoderm
at the distal end of a limb bud that stimulates
growth and elongation of the limb
arcuate line of the ilium
smooth ridge located at the
inferior margin of the iliac fossa; forms the lateral
portion of the pelvic brim
arm
region of the upper limb located between the
shoulder and elbow joints; contains the humerus
bone
auricular surface of the ilium
roughened area
located on the posterior, medial side of the ilium of
the hip bone; articulates with the auricular surface
of the sacrum to form the sacroiliac joint
base of the metatarsal bone
expanded, proximal
end of each metatarsal bone
bicipital groove
intertubercular groove; narrow
groove located between the greater and lesser
tubercles of the humerus
calcaneus
heel bone; posterior, inferior tarsal bone
that forms the heel of the foot
capitate
from the lateral side, the third of the four
distal carpal bones; articulates with the scaphoid
and lunate proximally, the trapezoid laterally, the
hamate medially, and primarily with the third
metacarpal distally
capitulum
knob-like bony structure located anteriorly
on the lateral, distal end of the humerus
carpal bone
one of the eight small bones that form
the wrist and base of the hand; these are grouped as
a proximal row consisting of (from lateral to medial)
the scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform
bones, and a distal row containing (from lateral to
medial) the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, and
hamate bones
carpal tunnel
passageway between the anterior
forearm and hand formed by the carpal bones and
flexor retinaculum
carpometacarpal joint
articulation between one of
the carpal bones in the distal row and a metacarpal
bone of the hand
clavicle
collarbone; elongated bone that articulates
with the manubrium of the sternum medially and
the acromion of the scapula laterally
coracoclavicular ligament
strong band of connective
tissue that anchors the coracoid process of the
scapula to the lateral clavicle; provides important
indirect support for the acromioclavicular joint
coracoid process
short, hook-like process that
projects anteriorly and laterally from the superior
margin of the scapula
coronoid fossa
depression on the anterior surface of
the humerus above the trochlea; this space receives
the coronoid process of the ulna when the elbow is
maximally flexed
coronoid process of the ulna
projecting bony lip
located on the anterior, proximal ulna; forms the
inferior margin of the trochlear notch
costoclavicular ligament
band of connective tissue
that unites the medial clavicle with the first rib
coxal bone
hip bone
cuboid
tarsal bone that articulates posteriorly with
the calcaneus bone, medially with the lateral
cuneiform bone, and anteriorly with the fourth and
fifth metatarsal bones
deltoid tuberosity
roughened, V-shaped region
located laterally on the mid-shaft of the humerus
distal radioulnar joint
articulation between the head
8 • Key Terms
301
of the ulna and the ulnar notch of the radius
distal tibiofibular joint
articulation between the
distal fibula and the fibular notch of the tibia
elbow joint
joint located between the upper arm and
forearm regions of the upper limb; formed by the
articulations between the trochlea of the humerus
and the trochlear notch of the ulna, and the
capitulum of the humerus and the head of the radius
femur
thigh bone; the single bone of the thigh
fibula
thin, non-weight-bearing bone found on the
lateral side of the leg
fibular notch
wide groove on the lateral side of the
distal tibia for articulation with the fibula at the
distal tibiofibular joint
flexor retinaculum
strong band of connective tissue
at the anterior wrist that spans the top of the U-
shaped grouping of the carpal bones to form the
roof of the carpal tunnel
foot
portion of the lower limb located distal to the
ankle joint
forearm
region of the upper limb located between
the elbow and wrist joints; contains the radius and
ulna bones
fossa
(plural = fossae) shallow depression on the
surface of a bone
fovea capitis
minor indentation on the head of the
femur that serves as the site of attachment for the
ligament to the head of the femur
glenohumeral joint
shoulder joint; formed by the
articulation between the glenoid cavity of the
scapula and the head of the humerus
glenoid cavity
(also, glenoid fossa) shallow
depression located on the lateral scapula, between
the superior and lateral borders
gluteal tuberosity
roughened area on the posterior
side of the proximal femur, extending inferiorly from
the base of the greater trochanter
greater pelvis
(also, greater pelvic cavity or false
pelvis) broad space above the pelvic brim defined
laterally by the fan-like portion of the upper ilium
greater sciatic foramen
pelvic opening formed by the
greater sciatic notch of the hip bone, the sacrum,
and the sacrospinous ligament
greater sciatic notch
large, U-shaped indentation
located on the posterior margin of the ilium,
superior to the ischial spine
greater trochanter
large, bony expansion of the
femur that projects superiorly from the base of the
femoral neck
greater tubercle
enlarged prominence located on the
lateral side of the proximal humerus
hallux
big toe; digit 1 of the foot
hamate
from the lateral side, the fourth of the four
distal carpal bones; articulates with the lunate and
triquetrum proximally, the fourth and fifth
metacarpals distally, and the capitate laterally
hand
region of the upper limb distal to the wrist joint
head of the femur
rounded, proximal end of the
femur that articulates with the acetabulum of the
hip bone to form the hip joint
head of the fibula
small, knob-like, proximal end of
the fibula; articulates with the inferior aspect of the
lateral condyle of the tibia
head of the humerus
smooth, rounded region on the
medial side of the proximal humerus; articulates
with the glenoid fossa of the scapula to form the
glenohumeral (shoulder) joint
head of the metatarsal bone
expanded, distal end of
each metatarsal bone
head of the radius
disc-shaped structure that forms
the proximal end of the radius; articulates with the
capitulum of the humerus as part of the elbow joint,
and with the radial notch of the ulna as part of the
proximal radioulnar joint
head of the ulna
small, rounded distal end of the
ulna; articulates with the ulnar notch of the distal
radius, forming the distal radioulnar joint
hip bone
coxal bone; single bone that forms the
pelvic girdle; consists of three areas, the ilium,
ischium, and pubis
hip joint
joint located at the proximal end of the lower
limb; formed by the articulation between the
acetabulum of the hip bone and the head of the
femur
hook of the hamate bone
bony extension located on
the anterior side of the hamate carpal bone
humerus
single bone of the upper arm
iliac crest
curved, superior margin of the ilium
iliac fossa
shallow depression found on the anterior
and medial surfaces of the upper ilium
ilium
superior portion of the hip bone
inferior angle of the scapula
inferior corner of the
scapula located where the medial and lateral
borders meet
inferior pubic ramus
narrow segment of bone that
passes inferiorly and laterally from the pubic body;
joins with the ischial ramus to form the ischiopubic
ramus
infraglenoid tubercle
small bump or roughened area
located on the lateral border of the scapula, near
the inferior margin of the glenoid cavity
infraspinous fossa
broad depression located on the
posterior scapula, inferior to the spine
intercondylar eminence
irregular elevation on the
superior end of the tibia, between the articulating
surfaces of the medial and lateral condyles
302
8 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
intercondylar fossa
deep depression on the posterior
side of the distal femur that separates the medial
and lateral condyles
intermediate cuneiform
middle of the three
cuneiform tarsal bones; articulates posteriorly with
the navicular bone, medially with the medial
cuneiform bone, laterally with the lateral cuneiform
bone, and anteriorly with the second metatarsal
bone
interosseous border of the fibula
small ridge running
down the medial side of the fibular shaft; for
attachment of the interosseous membrane between
the fibula and tibia
interosseous border of the radius
narrow ridge
located on the medial side of the radial shaft; for
attachment of the interosseous membrane between
the ulna and radius bones
interosseous border of the tibia
small ridge running
down the lateral side of the tibial shaft; for
attachment of the interosseous membrane between
the tibia and fibula
interosseous border of the ulna
narrow ridge located
on the lateral side of the ulnar shaft; for attachment
of the interosseous membrane between the ulna
and radius
interosseous membrane of the forearm
sheet of
dense connective tissue that unites the radius and
ulna bones
interosseous membrane of the leg
sheet of dense
connective tissue that unites the shafts of the tibia
and fibula bones
interphalangeal joint
articulation between adjacent
phalanx bones of the hand or foot digits
intertrochanteric crest
short, prominent ridge
running between the greater and lesser trochanters
on the posterior side of the proximal femur
intertrochanteric line
small ridge running between
the greater and lesser trochanters on the anterior
side of the proximal femur
intertubercular groove (sulcus)
bicipital groove;
narrow groove located between the greater and
lesser tubercles of the humerus
ischial ramus
bony extension projecting anteriorly
and superiorly from the ischial tuberosity; joins with
the inferior pubic ramus to form the ischiopubic
ramus
ischial spine
pointed, bony projection from the
posterior margin of the ischium that separates the
greater sciatic notch and lesser sciatic notch
ischial tuberosity
large, roughened protuberance
that forms the posteroinferior portion of the hip
bone; weight-bearing region of the pelvis when
sitting
ischiopubic ramus
narrow extension of bone that
connects the ischial tuberosity to the pubic body;
formed by the junction of the ischial ramus and
inferior pubic ramus
ischium
posteroinferior portion of the hip bone
knee joint
joint that separates the thigh and leg
portions of the lower limb; formed by the
articulations between the medial and lateral
condyles of the femur, and the medial and lateral
condyles of the tibia
lateral border of the scapula
diagonally oriented
lateral margin of the scapula
lateral condyle of the femur
smooth, articulating
surface that forms the distal and posterior sides of
the lateral expansion of the distal femur
lateral condyle of the tibia
lateral, expanded region
of the proximal tibia that includes the smooth
surface that articulates with the lateral condyle of
the femur as part of the knee joint
lateral cuneiform
most lateral of the three cuneiform
tarsal bones; articulates posteriorly with the
navicular bone, medially with the intermediate
cuneiform bone, laterally with the cuboid bone, and
anteriorly with the third metatarsal bone
lateral epicondyle of the femur
roughened area of
the femur located on the lateral side of the lateral
condyle
lateral epicondyle of the humerus
small projection
located on the lateral side of the distal humerus
lateral malleolus
expanded distal end of the fibula
lateral supracondylar ridge
narrow, bony ridge
located along the lateral side of the distal humerus,
superior to the lateral epicondyle
leg
portion of the lower limb located between the
knee and ankle joints
lesser pelvis
(also, lesser pelvic cavity or true pelvis)
narrow space located within the pelvis, defined
superiorly by the pelvic brim (pelvic inlet) and
inferiorly by the pelvic outlet
lesser sciatic foramen
pelvic opening formed by the
lesser sciatic notch of the hip bone, the
sacrospinous ligament, and the sacrotuberous
ligament
lesser sciatic notch
shallow indentation along the
posterior margin of the ischium, inferior to the
ischial spine
lesser trochanter
small, bony projection on the
medial side of the proximal femur, at the base of the
femoral neck
lesser tubercle
small, bony prominence located on
anterior side of the proximal humerus
ligament of the head of the femur
ligament that
spans the acetabulum of the hip bone and the fovea
8 • Key Terms
303
capitis of the femoral head
limb bud
small elevation that appears on the lateral
side of the embryo during the fourth or fifth week of
development, which gives rise to an upper or lower
limb
linea aspera
longitudinally running bony ridge
located in the middle third of the posterior femur
lunate
from the lateral side, the second of the four
proximal carpal bones; articulates with the radius
proximally, the capitate and hamate distally, the
scaphoid laterally, and the triquetrum medially
medial border of the scapula
elongated, medial
margin of the scapula
medial condyle of the femur
smooth, articulating
surface that forms the distal and posterior sides of
the medial expansion of the distal femur
medial condyle of the tibia
medial, expanded region
of the proximal tibia that includes the smooth
surface that articulates with the medial condyle of
the femur as part of the knee joint
medial cuneiform
most medial of the three
cuneiform tarsal bones; articulates posteriorly with
the navicular bone, laterally with the intermediate
cuneiform bone, and anteriorly with the first and
second metatarsal bones
medial epicondyle of the femur
roughened area of
the distal femur located on the medial side of the
medial condyle
medial epicondyle of the humerus
enlarged
projection located on the medial side of the distal
humerus
medial malleolus
bony expansion located on the
medial side of the distal tibia
metacarpal bone
one of the five long bones that form
the palm of the hand; numbered 1–5, starting on the
lateral (thumb) side of the hand
metacarpophalangeal joint
articulation between the
distal end of a metacarpal bone of the hand and a
proximal phalanx bone of the thumb or a finger
metatarsal bone
one of the five elongated bones that
forms the anterior half of the foot; numbered 1–5,
starting on the medial side of the foot
metatarsophalangeal joint
articulation between a
metatarsal bone of the foot and the proximal
phalanx bone of a toe
midcarpal joint
articulation between the proximal
and distal rows of the carpal bones; contributes to
movements of the hand at the wrist
navicular
tarsal bone that articulates posteriorly with
the talus bone, laterally with the cuboid bone, and
anteriorly with the medial, intermediate, and lateral
cuneiform bones
neck of the femur
narrowed region located inferior to
the head of the femur
neck of the radius
narrowed region immediately
distal to the head of the radius
obturator foramen
large opening located in the
anterior hip bone, between the pubis and ischium
regions
olecranon fossa
large depression located on the
posterior side of the distal humerus; this space
receives the olecranon process of the ulna when the
elbow is fully extended
olecranon process
expanded posterior and superior
portions of the proximal ulna; forms the bony tip of
the elbow
patella
kneecap; the largest sesamoid bone of the
body; articulates with the distal femur
patellar surface
smooth groove located on the
anterior side of the distal femur, between the medial
and lateral condyles; site of articulation for the
patella
pectineal line
narrow ridge located on the superior
surface of the superior pubic ramus
pectoral girdle
shoulder girdle; the set of bones,
consisting of the scapula and clavicle, which
attaches each upper limb to the axial skeleton
pelvic brim
pelvic inlet; the dividing line between the
greater and lesser pelvic regions; formed by the
superior margin of the pubic symphysis, the
pectineal lines of each pubis, the arcuate lines of
each ilium, and the sacral promontory
pelvic girdle
hip girdle; consists of a single hip bone,
which attaches a lower limb to the sacrum of the
axial skeleton
pelvic inlet
pelvic brim
pelvic outlet
inferior opening of the lesser pelvis;
formed by the inferior margin of the pubic
symphysis, right and left ischiopubic rami and
sacrotuberous ligaments, and the tip of the coccyx
pelvis
ring of bone consisting of the right and left hip
bones, the sacrum, and the coccyx
phalanx bone of the foot
(plural = phalanges) one of
the 14 bones that form the toes; these include the
proximal and distal phalanges of the big toe, and the
proximal, middle, and distal phalanx bones of toes
two through five
phalanx bone of the hand
(plural = phalanges) one of
the 14 bones that form the thumb and fingers; these
include the proximal and distal phalanges of the
thumb, and the proximal, middle, and distal phalanx
bones of the fingers two through five
pisiform
from the lateral side, the fourth of the four
proximal carpal bones; articulates with the anterior
surface of the triquetrum
pollex
(also, thumb) digit 1 of the hand
304
8 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
posterior inferior iliac spine
small, bony projection
located at the inferior margin of the auricular
surface on the posterior ilium
posterior sacroiliac ligament
strong ligament
spanning the sacrum and ilium of the hip bone that
supports the posterior side of the sacroiliac joint
posterior superior iliac spine
rounded, posterior end
of the iliac crest
proximal radioulnar joint
articulation formed by the
radial notch of the ulna and the head of the radius
proximal tibiofibular joint
articulation between the
head of the fibula and the inferior aspect of the
lateral condyle of the tibia
pubic arch
bony structure formed by the pubic
symphysis, and the bodies and inferior pubic rami of
the right and left pubic bones
pubic body
enlarged, medial portion of the pubis
region of the hip bone
pubic symphysis
joint formed by the articulation
between the pubic bodies of the right and left hip
bones
pubic tubercle
small bump located on the superior
aspect of the pubic body
pubis
anterior portion of the hip bone
radial fossa
small depression located on the anterior
humerus above the capitulum; this space receives
the head of the radius when the elbow is maximally
flexed
radial notch of the ulna
small, smooth area on the
lateral side of the proximal ulna; articulates with the
head of the radius as part of the proximal radioulnar
joint
radial tuberosity
oval-shaped, roughened
protuberance located on the medial side of the
proximal radius
radiocarpal joint
wrist joint, located between the
forearm and hand regions of the upper limb;
articulation formed proximally by the distal end of
the radius and the fibrocartilaginous pad that unites
the distal radius and ulna bone, and distally by the
scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum carpal bones
radius
bone located on the lateral side of the forearm
sacroiliac joint
joint formed by the articulation
between the auricular surfaces of the sacrum and
ilium
sacrospinous ligament
ligament that spans the
sacrum to the ischial spine of the hip bone
sacrotuberous ligament
ligament that spans the
sacrum to the ischial tuberosity of the hip bone
scaphoid
from the lateral side, the first of the four
proximal carpal bones; articulates with the radius
proximally, the trapezoid, trapezium, and capitate
distally, and the lunate medially
scapula
shoulder blade bone located on the posterior
side of the shoulder
shaft of the femur
cylindrically shaped region that
forms the central portion of the femur
shaft of the fibula
elongated, slender portion located
between the expanded ends of the fibula
shaft of the humerus
narrow, elongated, central
region of the humerus
shaft of the radius
narrow, elongated, central region
of the radius
shaft of the tibia
triangular-shaped, central portion
of the tibia
shaft of the ulna
narrow, elongated, central region of
the ulna
soleal line
small, diagonally running ridge located on
the posterior side of the proximal tibia
spine of the scapula
prominent ridge passing
mediolaterally across the upper portion of the
posterior scapular surface
sternal end of the clavicle
medial end of the clavicle
that articulates with the manubrium of the sternum
sternoclavicular joint
articulation between the
manubrium of the sternum and the sternal end of
the clavicle; forms the only bony attachment
between the pectoral girdle of the upper limb and
the axial skeleton
styloid process of the radius
pointed projection
located on the lateral end of the distal radius
styloid process of the ulna
short, bony projection
located on the medial end of the distal ulna
subpubic angle
inverted V-shape formed by the
convergence of the right and left ischiopubic rami;
this angle is greater than 80 degrees in females and
less than 70 degrees in males
subscapular fossa
broad depression located on the
anterior (deep) surface of the scapula
superior angle of the scapula
corner of the scapula
between the superior and medial borders of the
scapula
superior border of the scapula
superior margin of
the scapula
superior pubic ramus
narrow segment of bone that
passes laterally from the pubic body to join the ilium
supraglenoid tubercle
small bump located at the
superior margin of the glenoid cavity
suprascapular notch
small notch located along the
superior border of the scapula, medial to the
coracoid process
supraspinous fossa
narrow depression located on
the posterior scapula, superior to the spine
surgical neck
region of the humerus where the
expanded, proximal end joins with the narrower
shaft
8 • Key Terms
305
sustentaculum tali
bony ledge extending from the
medial side of the calcaneus bone
talus
tarsal bone that articulates superiorly with the
tibia and fibula at the ankle joint; also articulates
inferiorly with the calcaneus bone and anteriorly
with the navicular bone
tarsal bone
one of the seven bones that make up the
posterior foot; includes the calcaneus, talus,
navicular, cuboid, medial cuneiform, intermediate
cuneiform, and lateral cuneiform bones
thigh
portion of the lower limb located between the
hip and knee joints
tibia
shin bone; the large, weight-bearing bone
located on the medial side of the leg
tibial tuberosity
elevated area on the anterior
surface of the proximal tibia
trapezium
from the lateral side, the first of the four
distal carpal bones; articulates with the scaphoid
proximally, the first and second metacarpals
distally, and the trapezoid medially
trapezoid
from the lateral side, the second of the four
distal carpal bones; articulates with the scaphoid
proximally, the second metacarpal distally, the
trapezium laterally, and the capitate medially
triquetrum
from the lateral side, the third of the four
proximal carpal bones; articulates with the lunate
laterally, the hamate distally, and has a facet for the
pisiform
trochlea
pulley-shaped region located medially at the
distal end of the humerus; articulates at the elbow
with the trochlear notch of the ulna
trochlear notch
large, C-shaped depression located
on the anterior side of the proximal ulna; articulates
at the elbow with the trochlea of the humerus
ulna
bone located on the medial side of the forearm
ulnar notch of the radius
shallow, smooth area
located on the medial side of the distal radius;
articulates with the head of the ulna at the distal
radioulnar joint
ulnar tuberosity
roughened area located on the
anterior, proximal ulna inferior to the coronoid
process
Chapter Review
8.1 The Pectoral Girdle
The pectoral girdle, consisting of the clavicle and the
scapula, attaches each upper limb to the axial
skeleton. The clavicle is an anterior bone whose sternal
end articulates with the manubrium of the sternum at
the sternoclavicular joint. The sternal end is also
anchored to the first rib by the costoclavicular
ligament. The acromial end of the clavicle articulates
with the acromion of the scapula at the
acromioclavicular joint. This end is also anchored to
the coracoid process of the scapula by the
coracoclavicular ligament, which provides indirect
support for the acromioclavicular joint. The clavicle
supports the scapula, transmits the weight and forces
from the upper limb to the body trunk, and protects the
underlying nerves and blood vessels.
The scapula lies on the posterior aspect of the pectoral
girdle. It mediates the attachment of the upper limb to
the clavicle, and contributes to the formation of the
glenohumeral (shoulder) joint. This triangular bone has
three sides called the medial, lateral, and superior
borders. The suprascapular notch is located on the
superior border. The scapula also has three corners,
two of which are the superior and inferior angles. The
third corner is occupied by the glenoid cavity.
Posteriorly, the spine separates the supraspinous and
infraspinous fossae, and then extends laterally as the
acromion. The subscapular fossa is located on the
anterior surface of the scapula. The coracoid process
projects anteriorly, passing inferior to the lateral end of
the clavicle.
8.2 Bones of the Upper Limb
Each upper limb is divided into three regions and
contains a total of 30 bones. The upper arm is the
region located between the shoulder and elbow joints.
This area contains the humerus. The proximal humerus
consists of the head, which articulates with the scapula
at the glenohumeral joint, the greater and lesser
tubercles separated by the intertubercular (bicipital)
groove, and the anatomical and surgical necks. The
humeral shaft has the roughened area of the deltoid
tuberosity on its lateral side. The distal humerus is
flattened, forming a lateral supracondylar ridge that
terminates at the small lateral epicondyle. The medial
side of the distal humerus has the large, medial
epicondyle. The articulating surfaces of the distal
humerus consist of the trochlea medially and the
capitulum laterally. Depressions on the humerus that
accommodate the forearm bones during bending
(flexing) and straightening (extending) of the elbow
include the coronoid fossa, the radial fossa, and the
olecranon fossa.
The forearm is the region of the upper limb located
between the elbow and wrist joints. This region
contains two bones, the ulna medially and the radius
on the lateral (thumb) side. The elbow joint is formed
by the articulation between the trochlea of the
humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna, plus the
306
8 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
articulation between the capitulum of the humerus and
the head of the radius. The proximal radioulnar joint is
the articulation between the head of the radius and the
radial notch of the ulna. The proximal ulna also has the
olecranon process, forming an expanded posterior
region, and the coronoid process and ulnar tuberosity
on its anterior aspect. On the proximal radius, the
narrowed region below the head is the neck; distal to
this is the radial tuberosity. The shaft portions of both
the ulna and radius have an interosseous border,
whereas the distal ends of each bone have a pointed
styloid process. The distal radioulnar joint is found
between the head of the ulna and the ulnar notch of
the radius. The distal end of the radius articulates with
the proximal carpal bones, but the ulna does not.
The base of the hand is formed by eight carpal bones.
The carpal bones are united into two rows of bones.
The proximal row contains (from lateral to medial) the
scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform bones. The
scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum bones contribute to
the formation of the radiocarpal joint. The distal row of
carpal bones contains (from medial to lateral) the
hamate, capitate, trapezoid, and trapezium bones (“So
Long To Pinky, Here Comes The Thumb”). The anterior
hamate has a prominent bony hook. The proximal and
distal carpal rows articulate with each other at the
midcarpal joint. The carpal bones, together with the
flexor retinaculum, also form the carpal tunnel of the
wrist.
The five metacarpal bones form the palm of the hand.
The metacarpal bones are numbered 1–5, starting with
the thumb side. The first metacarpal bone is freely
mobile, but the other bones are united as a group. The
digits are also numbered 1–5, with the thumb being
number 1. The fingers and thumb contain a total of 14
phalanges (phalanx bones). The thumb contains a
proximal and a distal phalanx, whereas the remaining
digits each contain proximal, middle, and distal
phalanges.
8.3 The Pelvic Girdle and Pelvis
The pelvic girdle, consisting of a hip bone, serves to
attach a lower limb to the axial skeleton. The hip bone
articulates posteriorly at the sacroiliac joint with the
sacrum, which is part of the axial skeleton. The right
and left hip bones converge anteriorly and articulate
with each other at the pubic symphysis. The
combination of the hip bone, the sacrum, and the
coccyx forms the pelvis. The pelvis has a pronounced
anterior tilt. The primary function of the pelvis is to
support the upper body and transfer body weight to the
lower limbs. It also serves as the site of attachment for
multiple muscles.
The hip bone consists of three regions: the ilium,
ischium, and pubis. The ilium forms the large, fan-like
region of the hip bone. The superior margin of this area
is the iliac crest. Located at either end of the iliac crest
are the anterior superior and posterior superior iliac
spines. Inferior to these are the anterior inferior and
posterior inferior iliac spines. The auricular surface of
the ilium articulates with the sacrum to form the
sacroiliac joint. The medial surface of the upper ilium
forms the iliac fossa, with the arcuate line marking the
inferior limit of this area. The posterior margin of the
ilium has the large greater sciatic notch.
The posterolateral portion of the hip bone is the
ischium. It has the expanded ischial tuberosity, which
supports body weight when sitting. The ischial ramus
projects anteriorly and superiorly. The posterior margin
of the ischium has the shallow lesser sciatic notch and
the ischial spine, which separates the greater and
lesser sciatic notches.
The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone.
The body of the pubis articulates with the pubis of the
opposite hip bone at the pubic symphysis. The superior
margin of the pubic body has the pubic tubercle. The
pubis is joined to the ilium by the superior pubic ramus,
the superior surface of which forms the pectineal line.
The inferior pubic ramus projects inferiorly and
laterally. The pubic arch is formed by the pubic
symphysis, the bodies of the adjacent pubic bones, and
the two inferior pubic rami. The inferior pubic ramus
joins the ischial ramus to form the ischiopubic ramus.
The subpubic angle is formed by the medial
convergence of the right and left ischiopubic rami.
The lateral side of the hip bone has the cup-like
acetabulum, which is part of the hip joint. The large
anterior opening is the obturator foramen. The
sacroiliac joint is supported by the anterior and
posterior sacroiliac ligaments. The sacrum is also
joined to the hip bone by the sacrospinous ligament,
which attaches to the ischial spine, and the
sacrotuberous ligament, which attaches to the ischial
tuberosity. The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous
ligaments contribute to the formation of the greater
and lesser sciatic foramina.
The broad space of the upper pelvis is the greater
pelvis, and the narrow, inferior space is the lesser
pelvis. These areas are separated by the pelvic brim
(pelvic inlet). The inferior opening of the pelvis is the
pelvic outlet. Compared to the male, the female pelvis
is wider to accommodate childbirth, has a larger
subpubic angle, and a broader greater sciatic notch.
8 • Chapter Review
307
8.4 Bones of the Lower Limb
The lower limb is divided into three regions. These are
the thigh, located between the hip and knee joints; the
leg, located between the knee and ankle joints; and
distal to the ankle, the foot. There are 30 bones in each
lower limb. These are the femur, patella, tibia, fibula,
seven tarsal bones, five metatarsal bones, and 14
phalanges.
The femur is the single bone of the thigh. Its rounded
head articulates with the acetabulum of the hip bone to
form the hip joint. The head has the fovea capitis for
attachment of the ligament of the head of the femur.
The narrow neck joins inferiorly with the greater and
lesser trochanters. Passing between these bony
expansions are the intertrochanteric line on the
anterior femur and the larger intertrochanteric crest on
the posterior femur. On the posterior shaft of the femur
is the gluteal tuberosity proximally and the linea aspera
in the mid-shaft region. The expanded distal end
consists of three articulating surfaces: the medial and
lateral condyles, and the patellar surface. The outside
margins of the condyles are the medial and lateral
epicondyles. The adductor tubercle is on the superior
aspect of the medial epicondyle.
The patella is a sesamoid bone located within a muscle
tendon. It articulates with the patellar surface on the
anterior side of the distal femur, thereby protecting the
muscle tendon from rubbing against the femur.
The leg contains the large tibia on the medial side and
the slender fibula on the lateral side. The tibia bears
the weight of the body, whereas the fibula does not
bear weight. The interosseous border of each bone is
the attachment site for the interosseous membrane of
the leg, the connective tissue sheet that unites the tibia
and fibula.
The proximal tibia consists of the expanded medial and
lateral condyles, which articulate with the medial and
lateral condyles of the femur to form the knee joint.
Between the tibial condyles is the intercondylar
eminence. On the anterior side of the proximal tibia is
the tibial tuberosity, which is continuous inferiorly with
the anterior border of the tibia. On the posterior side,
the proximal tibia has the curved soleal line. The bony
expansion on the medial side of the distal tibia is the
medial malleolus. The groove on the lateral side of the
distal tibia is the fibular notch.
The head of the fibula forms the proximal end and
articulates with the underside of the lateral condyle of
the tibia. The distal fibula articulates with the fibular
notch of the tibia. The expanded distal end of the fibula
is the lateral malleolus.
The posterior foot is formed by the seven tarsal bones.
The talus articulates superiorly with the distal tibia, the
medial malleolus of the tibia, and the lateral malleolus
of the fibula to form the ankle joint. The talus
articulates inferiorly with the calcaneus bone. The
sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus helps to support
the talus. Anterior to the talus is the navicular bone,
and anterior to this are the medial, intermediate, and
lateral cuneiform bones. The cuboid bone is anterior to
the calcaneus.
The five metatarsal bones form the anterior foot. The
base of these bones articulate with the cuboid or
cuneiform bones. The metatarsal heads, at their distal
ends, articulate with the proximal phalanges of the
toes. The big toe (toe number 1) has proximal and
distal phalanx bones. The remaining toes have
proximal, middle, and distal phalanges.
8.5 Development of the Appendicular
Skeleton
The bones of the appendicular skeleton arise from
embryonic mesenchyme. Limb buds appear at the end
of the fourth week. The apical ectodermal ridge,
located at the end of the limb bud, stimulates growth
and elongation of the limb. During the sixth week, the
distal end of the limb bud becomes paddle-shaped,
and selective cell death separates the developing
fingers and toes. At the same time, mesenchyme within
the limb bud begins to differentiate into hyaline
cartilage, forming models for future bones. During the
seventh week, the upper limbs rotate laterally and the
lower limbs rotate medially, bringing the limbs into
their final positions.
Endochondral ossification, the process that converts
the hyaline cartilage model into bone, begins in most
appendicular bones by the twelfth fetal week. This
begins as a primary ossification center in the diaphysis,
followed by the later appearance of one or more
secondary ossifications centers in the regions of the
epiphyses. Each secondary ossification center is
separated from the primary ossification center by an
epiphyseal plate. Continued growth of the epiphyseal
plate cartilage provides for bone lengthening.
Disappearance of the epiphyseal plate is followed by
fusion of the bony components to form a single, adult
bone.
The clavicle develops via intramembranous
ossification, in which mesenchyme is converted
directly into bone tissue. Ossification within the clavicle
begins during the fifth week of development and
308
8 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
continues until 25 years of age.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/fractures) to
see how fractures of the distal radius bone can
affect the wrist joint. Explain the problems that may
occur if a fracture of the distal radius involves the
joint surface of the radiocarpal joint of the wrist.
2. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/handbone) to
explore the bones and joints of the hand. What are
the three arches of the hand, and what is the
importance of these during the gripping of an
object?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/colles) to
learn about a Colles fracture, a break of the distal
radius, usually caused by falling onto an
outstretched hand. When would surgery be
required and how would the fracture be repaired in
this case?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/3Dpelvis)
for a 3-D view of the pelvis and its associated
ligaments. What is the large opening in the bony
pelvis, located between the ischium and pubic
regions, and what two parts of the pubis contribute
to the formation of this opening?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/midfemur)
to view how a fracture of the mid-femur is surgically
repaired. How are the two portions of the broken
femur stabilized during surgical repair of a fractured
femur?
6. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/kneesurgery) to
watch a virtual knee replacement surgery. The
prosthetic knee components must be properly
aligned to function properly. How is this alignment
ensured?
7. Use this tutorial (http://openstax.org/l/footbones)
to review the bones of the foot. Which tarsal bones
are in the proximal, intermediate, and distal
groups?
8. View this link (http://openstax.org/l/bunion) to learn
about a bunion, a localized swelling on the medial
side of the foot, next to the first
metatarsophalangeal joint, at the base of the big
toe. What is a bunion and what type of shoe is most
likely to cause this to develop?
9. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
limbbuds) to follow the development and growth of
the upper and lower limb buds. On what days of
embryonic development do these events occur: (a)
first appearance of the upper limb bud (limb ridge);
(b) the flattening of the distal limb to form the
handplate or footplate; and (c) the beginning of
limb rotation?
Review Questions
10. Which part of the clavicle articulates with the
manubrium?
a.
shaft
b.
sternal end
c.
acromial end
d.
coracoid process
11. A shoulder separation results from injury to the
________.
a.
glenohumeral joint
b.
costoclavicular joint
c.
acromioclavicular joint
d.
sternoclavicular joint
12. Which feature lies between the spine and superior
border of the scapula?
a.
suprascapular notch
b.
glenoid cavity
c.
superior angle
d.
supraspinous fossa
13. What structure is an extension of the spine of the
scapula?
a.
acromion
b.
coracoid process
c.
supraglenoid tubercle
d.
glenoid cavity
14. Name the short, hook-like bony process of the
scapula that projects anteriorly.
a.
acromial process
b.
clavicle
c.
coracoid process
d.
glenoid fossa
15. How many bones are there in the upper limbs
combined?
a.
20
b.
30
c.
40
d.
60
8 • Interactive Link Questions
309
16. Which bony landmark is located on the lateral side
of the proximal humerus?
a.
greater tubercle
b.
trochlea
c.
lateral epicondyle
d.
lesser tubercle
17. Which region of the humerus articulates with the
radius as part of the elbow joint?
a.
trochlea
b.
styloid process
c.
capitulum
d.
olecranon process
18. Which is the lateral-most carpal bone of the
proximal row?
a.
trapezium
b.
hamate
c.
pisiform
d.
scaphoid
19. The radius bone ________.
a.
is found on the medial side of the forearm
b.
has a head that articulates with the radial
notch of the ulna
c.
does not articulate with any of the carpal
bones
d.
has the radial tuberosity located near its
distal end
20. How many bones fuse in adulthood to form the hip
bone?
a.
2
b.
3
c.
4
d.
5
21. Which component forms the superior part of the
hip bone?
a.
ilium
b.
pubis
c.
ischium
d.
sacrum
22. Which of the following supports body weight when
sitting?
a.
iliac crest
b.
ischial tuberosity
c.
ischiopubic ramus
d.
pubic body
23. The ischial spine is found between which of the
following structures?
a.
inferior pubic ramus and ischial ramus
b.
pectineal line and arcuate line
c.
lesser sciatic notch and greater sciatic notch
d.
anterior superior iliac spine and posterior
superior iliac spine
24. The pelvis ________.
a.
has a subpubic angle that is larger in females
b.
consists of the two hip bones, but does not
include the sacrum or coccyx
c.
has an obturator foramen, an opening that is
defined in part by the sacrospinous and
sacrotuberous ligaments
d.
has a space located inferior to the pelvic brim
called the greater pelvis
25. Which bony landmark of the femur serves as a site
for muscle attachments?
a.
fovea capitis
b.
lesser trochanter
c.
head
d.
medial condyle
26. What structure contributes to the knee joint?
a.
lateral malleolus of the fibula
b.
tibial tuberosity
c.
medial condyle of the tibia
d.
lateral epicondyle of the femur
27. Which tarsal bone articulates with the tibia and
fibula?
a.
calcaneus
b.
cuboid
c.
navicular
d.
talus
28. What is the total number of bones found in the
foot and toes?
a.
7
b.
14
c.
26
d.
30
29. The tibia ________.
a.
has an expanded distal end called the lateral
malleolus
b.
is not a weight-bearing bone
c.
is firmly anchored to the fibula by an
interosseous membrane
d.
can be palpated (felt) under the skin only at
its proximal and distal ends
310
8 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
30. Which event takes place during the seventh week
of development?
a.
appearance of the upper and lower limb buds
b.
flattening of the distal limb bud into a paddle
shape
c.
the first appearance of hyaline cartilage
models of future bones
d.
the rotation of the limbs
31. During endochondral ossification of a long bone,
________.
a.
a primary ossification center will develop
within the epiphysis
b.
mesenchyme will differentiate directly into
bone tissue
c.
growth of the epiphyseal plate will produce
bone lengthening
d.
all epiphyseal plates will disappear before
birth
32. The clavicle ________.
a.
develops via intramembranous ossification
b.
develops via endochondral ossification
c.
is the last bone of the body to begin
ossification
d.
is fully ossified at the time of birth
Critical Thinking Questions
33. Describe the shape and palpable line formed by
the clavicle and scapula.
34. Discuss two possible injuries of the pectoral girdle
that may occur following a strong blow to the
shoulder or a hard fall onto an outstretched hand.
35. Your friend runs out of gas and you have to help
push their car. Discuss the sequence of bones and
joints that convey the forces passing from your
hand, through your upper limb and your pectoral
girdle, and to your axial skeleton.
36. Name the bones in the wrist and hand, and
describe or sketch out their locations and
articulations.
37. Describe the articulations and ligaments that unite
the four bones of the pelvis to each other.
38. Discuss the ways in which the female pelvis is
adapted for childbirth.
39. Define the regions of the lower limb, name the
bones found in each region, and describe the bony
landmarks that articulate together to form the hip,
knee, and ankle joints.
40. The talus bone of the foot receives the weight of
the body from the tibia. The talus bone then
distributes this weight toward the ground in two
directions: one-half of the body weight is passed
in a posterior direction and one-half of the weight
is passed in an anterior direction. Describe the
arrangement of the tarsal and metatarsal bones
that are involved in both the posterior and anterior
distribution of body weight.
41. How can a radiograph of a child’s femur be used to
determine the approximate age of that child?
42. How does the development of the clavicle differ
from the development of other appendicular
skeleton bones?
8 • Critical Thinking Questions
311
312
8 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 9
Joints
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Discuss both functional and structural classifications for body joints
•
Describe the characteristic features for fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints and give examples of each
•
Define and identify the different body movements
•
Discuss the structure of specific body joints and the movements allowed by each
•
Explain the development of body joints
The adult human body has 206 bones, and with the exception of the hyoid bone in the neck, each
bone is connected to at least one other bone. Joints are the location where bones come together. Many joints allow
for movement between the bones. At these joints, the articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones can move
smoothly against each other. However, the bones of other joints may be joined to each other by connective tissue or
cartilage. These joints are designed for stability and provide for little or no movement. Importantly, joint stability and
movement are related to each other. This means that stable joints allow for little or no mobility between the
adjacent bones. Conversely, joints that provide the most movement between bones are the least stable.
Understanding the relationship between joint structure and function will help to explain why particular types of
joints are found in certain areas of the body.
The articulating surfaces of bones at stable types of joints, with little or no mobility, are strongly united to each
other. For example, most of the joints of the skull are held together by fibrous connective tissue and do not allow for
movement between the adjacent bones. This lack of mobility is important, because the skull bones serve to protect
the brain. Similarly, other joints united by fibrous connective tissue allow for very little movement, which provides
stability and weight-bearing support for the body. For example, the tibia and fibula of the leg are tightly united to
give stability to the body when standing. At other joints, the bones are held together by cartilage, which permits
limited movements between the bones. Thus, the joints of the vertebral column only allow for small movements
between adjacent vertebrae, but when added together, these movements provide the flexibility that allows your
body to twist, or bend to the front, back, or side. In contrast, at joints that allow for wide ranges of motion, the
articulating surfaces of the bones are not directly united to each other. Instead, these surfaces are enclosed within a
Figure 9.1
Kayaking Without joints, body movements would be impossible. (credit: Graham Richardson/flickr.com)
space filled with lubricating fluid, which allows the bones to move smoothly against each other. These joints provide
greater mobility, but since the bones are free to move in relation to each other, the joint is less stable. Most of the
joints between the bones of the appendicular skeleton are this freely moveable type of joint. These joints allow the
muscles of the body to pull on a bone and thereby produce movement of that body region. Your ability to kick a
soccer ball, pick up a fork, and dance the tango depend on mobility at these types of joints.
9.1 Classification of Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish between the functional and structural classifications for joints
•
Describe the three functional types of joints and give an example of each
•
List the three types of diarthrodial joints
A joint, also called an articulation, is any place where adjacent bones or bone and cartilage come together
(articulate with each other) to form a connection. Joints are classified both structurally and functionally. Structural
classifications of joints take into account whether the adjacent bones are strongly anchored to each other by fibrous
connective tissue or cartilage, or whether the adjacent bones articulate with each other within a fluid-filled space
called a joint cavity. Functional classifications describe the degree of movement available between the bones,
ranging from immobile, to slightly mobile, to freely moveable joints. The amount of movement available at a
particular joint of the body is related to the functional requirements for that joint. Thus immobile or slightly
moveable joints serve to protect internal organs, give stability to the body, and allow for limited body movement. In
contrast, freely moveable joints allow for much more extensive movements of the body and limbs.
Structural Classification of Joints
The structural classification of joints is based on whether the articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones are directly
connected by fibrous connective tissue or cartilage, or whether the articulating surfaces contact each other within a
fluid-filled joint cavity. These differences serve to divide the joints of the body into three structural classifications. A
fibrous joint is where the adjacent bones are united by fibrous connective tissue. At a cartilaginous joint, the bones
are joined by hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage. At a synovial joint, the articulating surfaces of the bones are not
directly connected, but instead come into contact with each other within a joint cavity that is filled with a lubricating
fluid. Synovial joints allow for free movement between the bones and are the most common joints of the body.
Functional Classification of Joints
The functional classification of joints is determined by the amount of mobility found between the adjacent bones.
Joints are thus functionally classified as a synarthrosis or immobile joint, an amphiarthrosis or slightly moveable
joint, or as a diarthrosis, which is a freely moveable joint (arthroun = “to fasten by a joint”). Depending on their
location, fibrous joints may be functionally classified as a synarthrosis (immobile joint) or an amphiarthrosis (slightly
mobile joint). Cartilaginous joints are also functionally classified as either a synarthrosis or an amphiarthrosis joint.
All synovial joints are functionally classified as a diarthrosis joint.
Synarthrosis
An immobile or nearly immobile joint is called a synarthrosis. The immobile nature of these joints provide for a
strong union between the articulating bones. This is important at locations where the bones provide protection for
internal organs. Examples include sutures, the fibrous joints between the bones of the skull that surround and
protect the brain (Figure 9.2), and the manubriosternal joint, the cartilaginous joint that unites the manubrium and
body of the sternum for protection of the heart.
314
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.2
Suture Joints of Skull
The suture joints of the skull are an example of a synarthrosis, an immobile or essentially immobile
joint.
Amphiarthrosis
An amphiarthrosis is a joint that has limited mobility. An example of this type of joint is the cartilaginous joint that
unites the bodies of adjacent vertebrae. Filling the gap between the vertebrae is a thick pad of fibrocartilage called
an intervertebral disc (Figure 9.3). Each intervertebral disc strongly unites the vertebrae but still allows for a limited
amount of movement between them. However, the small movements available between adjacent vertebrae can sum
together along the length of the vertebral column to provide for large ranges of body movements.
Another example of an amphiarthrosis is the pubic symphysis of the pelvis. This is a cartilaginous joint in which the
pubic regions of the right and left hip bones are strongly anchored to each other by fibrocartilage. This joint normally
has very little mobility. The strength of the pubic symphysis is important in conferring weight-bearing stability to the
pelvis.
FIGURE 9.3
Intervertebral Disc
An intervertebral disc unites the bodies of adjacent vertebrae within the vertebral column. Each disc
allows for limited movement between the vertebrae and thus functionally forms an amphiarthrosis type of joint. Intervertebral discs are
made of fibrocartilage and thereby structurally form a symphysis type of cartilaginous joint.
Diarthrosis
A freely mobile joint is classified as a diarthrosis. These types of joints include all synovial joints of the body, which
provide the majority of body movements. Most diarthrotic joints are found in the appendicular skeleton and thus
give the limbs a wide range of motion. These joints are divided into three categories, based on the number of axes of
motion provided by each. An axis in anatomy is described as the movements in reference to the three anatomical
planes: transverse, frontal, and sagittal. Thus, diarthroses are classified as uniaxial (for movement in one plane),
9.1 • Classification of Joints
315
biaxial (for movement in two planes), or multiaxial joints (for movement in all three anatomical planes).
A uniaxial joint only allows for a motion in a single plane (around a single axis). The elbow joint, which only allows
for bending or straightening, is an example of a uniaxial joint. A biaxial joint allows for motions within two planes.
An example of a biaxial joint is a metacarpophalangeal joint (knuckle joint) of the hand. The joint allows for
movement along one axis to produce bending or straightening of the finger, and movement along a second axis,
which allows for spreading of the fingers away from each other and bringing them together. A joint that allows for
the several directions of movement is called a multiaxial joint (polyaxial or triaxial joint). This type of diarthrotic
joint allows for movement along three axes (Figure 9.4). The shoulder and hip joints are multiaxial joints. They allow
the upper or lower limb to move in an anterior-posterior direction and a medial-lateral direction. In addition, the
limb can also be rotated around its long axis. This third movement results in rotation of the limb so that its anterior
surface is moved either toward or away from the midline of the body.
FIGURE 9.4
Multiaxial Joint
A multiaxial joint, such as the hip joint, allows for three types of movement: anterior-posterior, medial-
lateral, and rotational.
9.2 Fibrous Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structural features of fibrous joints
•
Distinguish between a suture, syndesmosis, and gomphosis
•
Give an example of each type of fibrous joint
At a fibrous joint, the adjacent bones are directly connected to each other by fibrous connective tissue, and thus the
bones do not have a joint cavity between them (Figure 9.5). The gap between the bones may be narrow or wide.
There are three types of fibrous joints. A suture is the narrow fibrous joint found between most bones of the skull. At
a syndesmosis joint, the bones are more widely separated but are held together by a narrow band of fibrous
connective tissue called a ligament or a wide sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane. This
type of fibrous joint is found between the shaft regions of the long bones in the forearm and in the leg. Lastly, a
gomphosis is the narrow fibrous joint between the roots of a tooth and the bony socket in the jaw into which the
tooth fits.
316
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.5
Fibrous Joints
Fibrous joints form strong connections between bones. (a) Sutures join most bones of the skull. (b) An
interosseous membrane forms a syndesmosis between the radius and ulna bones of the forearm. (c) A gomphosis is a specialized fibrous
joint that anchors a tooth to its socket in the jaw.
Suture
All the bones of the skull, except for the mandible, are joined to each other by a fibrous joint called a suture. The
fibrous connective tissue found at a suture (“to bind or sew”) strongly unites the adjacent skull bones and thus
helps to protect the brain and form the face. In adults, the skull bones are closely opposed and fibrous connective
tissue fills the narrow gap between the bones. The suture is frequently convoluted, forming a tight union that
prevents most movement between the bones. (See Figure 9.5a.) Thus, skull sutures are functionally classified as a
synarthrosis, although some sutures may allow for slight movements between the cranial bones.
In newborns and infants, the areas of connective tissue between the bones are much wider, especially in those
areas on the top and sides of the skull that will become the sagittal, coronal, squamous, and lambdoid sutures.
These broad areas of connective tissue are called fontanelles (Figure 9.6). During birth, the fontanelles provide
flexibility to the skull, allowing the bones to push closer together or to overlap slightly, thus aiding movement of the
infant’s head through the birth canal. After birth, these expanded regions of connective tissue allow for rapid growth
of the skull and enlargement of the brain. The fontanelles greatly decrease in width during the first year after birth as
the skull bones enlarge. When the connective tissue between the adjacent bones is reduced to a narrow layer, these
fibrous joints are now called sutures. At some sutures, the connective tissue will ossify and be converted into bone,
causing the adjacent bones to fuse to each other. This fusion between bones is called a synostosis (“joined by
bone”). Examples of synostosis fusions between cranial bones are found both early and late in life. At the time of
birth, the frontal and maxillary bones consist of right and left halves joined together by sutures, which disappear by
the eighth year as the halves fuse together to form a single bone. Late in life, the sagittal, coronal, and lambdoid
sutures of the skull will begin to ossify and fuse, causing the suture line to gradually disappear.
9.2 • Fibrous Joints
317
FIGURE 9.6
The Newborn Skull
The fontanelles of a newborn’s skull are broad areas of fibrous connective tissue that form fibrous
joints between the bones of the skull.
Syndesmosis
A syndesmosis (“fastened with a band”) is a type of fibrous joint in which two parallel bones are united to each
other by fibrous connective tissue. The gap between the bones may be narrow, with the bones joined by ligaments,
or the gap may be wide and filled in by a broad sheet of connective tissue called an interosseous membrane.
In the forearm, the wide gap between the shaft portions of the radius and ulna bones are strongly united by an
interosseous membrane (see Figure 9.5b). Similarly, in the leg, the shafts of the tibia and fibula are also united by an
interosseous membrane. In addition, at the distal tibiofibular joint, the articulating surfaces of the bones lack
cartilage and the narrow gap between the bones is anchored by fibrous connective tissue and ligaments on both the
anterior and posterior aspects of the joint. Together, the interosseous membrane and these ligaments form the
tibiofibular syndesmosis.
The syndesmoses found in the forearm and leg serve to unite parallel bones and prevent their separation. However,
a syndesmosis does not prevent all movement between the bones, and thus this type of fibrous joint is functionally
classified as an amphiarthrosis. In the leg, the syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula strongly unites the bones,
allows for little movement, and firmly locks the talus bone in place between the tibia and fibula at the ankle joint.
This provides strength and stability to the leg and ankle, which are important during weight bearing. In the forearm,
the interosseous membrane is flexible enough to allow for rotation of the radius bone during forearm movements.
Thus in contrast to the stability provided by the tibiofibular syndesmosis, the flexibility of the antebrachial
interosseous membrane allows for the much greater mobility of the forearm.
The interosseous membranes of the leg and forearm also provide areas for muscle attachment. Damage to a
syndesmotic joint, which usually results from a fracture of the bone with an accompanying tear of the interosseous
membrane, will produce pain, loss of stability of the bones, and may damage the muscles attached to the
interosseous membrane. If the fracture site is not properly immobilized with a cast or splint, contractile activity by
these muscles can cause improper alignment of the broken bones during healing.
Gomphosis
A gomphosis (“fastened with bolts”) is the specialized fibrous joint that anchors the root of a tooth into its bony
socket within the maxillary bone (upper jaw) or mandible bone (lower jaw) of the skull. A gomphosis is also known
as a peg-and-socket joint. Spanning between the bony walls of the socket and the root of the tooth are numerous
short bands of dense connective tissue, each of which is called a periodontal ligament (see Figure 9.5c). Due to the
immobility of a gomphosis, this type of joint is functionally classified as a synarthrosis.
318
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 Cartilaginous Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structural features of cartilaginous joints
•
Distinguish between a synchondrosis and symphysis
•
Give an example of each type of cartilaginous joint
As the name indicates, at a cartilaginous joint, the adjacent bones are united by cartilage, a tough but flexible type of
connective tissue. These types of joints lack a joint cavity and involve bones that are joined together by either
hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage (Figure 9.7). There are two types of cartilaginous joints. A synchondrosis is a
cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by hyaline cartilage. Also classified as a synchondrosis are places
where bone is united to a cartilage structure, such as between the anterior end of a rib and the costal cartilage of the
thoracic cage. The second type of cartilaginous joint is a symphysis, where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage.
FIGURE 9.7
Cartilaginous Joints
At cartilaginous joints, bones are united by hyaline cartilage to form a synchondrosis or by
fibrocartilage to form a symphysis. (a) The hyaline cartilage of the epiphyseal plate (growth plate) forms a synchondrosis that unites the
shaft (diaphysis) and end (epiphysis) of a long bone and allows the bone to grow in length. (b) The pubic portions of the right and left hip
bones of the pelvis are joined together by fibrocartilage, forming the pubic symphysis.
Synchondrosis
A synchondrosis (“joined by cartilage”) is a cartilaginous joint where bones are joined together by hyaline cartilage,
or where bone is united to hyaline cartilage. A synchondrosis may be temporary or permanent. A temporary
synchondrosis is the epiphyseal plate (growth plate) of a growing long bone. The epiphyseal plate is the region of
growing hyaline cartilage that unites the diaphysis (shaft) of the bone to the epiphysis (end of the bone). Bone
lengthening involves growth of the epiphyseal plate cartilage and its replacement by bone, which adds to the
diaphysis. For many years during childhood growth, the rates of cartilage growth and bone formation are equal and
thus the epiphyseal plate does not change in overall thickness as the bone lengthens. During the late teens and
early 20s, growth of the cartilage slows and eventually stops. The epiphyseal plate is then completely replaced by
bone, and the diaphysis and epiphysis portions of the bone fuse together to form a single adult bone. This fusion of
the diaphysis and epiphysis is a synostosis. Once this occurs, bone lengthening ceases. For this reason, the
epiphyseal plate is considered to be a temporary synchondrosis. Because cartilage is softer than bone tissue, injury
to a growing long bone can damage the epiphyseal plate cartilage, thus stopping bone growth and preventing
additional bone lengthening.
Growing layers of cartilage also form synchondroses that join together the ilium, ischium, and pubic portions of the
hip bone during childhood and adolescence. When body growth stops, the cartilage disappears and is replaced by
bone, forming synostoses and fusing the bony components together into the single hip bone of the adult. Similarly,
synostoses unite the sacral vertebrae that fuse together to form the adult sacrum.
9.3 • Cartilaginous Joints
319
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/childhand) to view a radiograph (X-ray image) of a child’s hand and wrist.
The growing bones of child have an epiphyseal plate that forms a synchondrosis between the shaft and end of a long
bone. Being less dense than bone, the area of epiphyseal cartilage is seen on this radiograph as the dark epiphyseal
gaps located near the ends of the long bones, including the radius, ulna, metacarpal, and phalanx bones. Which of
the bones in this image do not show an epiphyseal plate (epiphyseal gap)?
Examples of permanent synchondroses are found in the thoracic cage. One example is the first sternocostal joint,
where the first rib is anchored to the manubrium by its costal cartilage. (The articulations of the remaining costal
cartilages to the sternum are all synovial joints.) Additional synchondroses are formed where the anterior end of the
other 11 ribs is joined to its costal cartilage. Unlike the temporary synchondroses of the epiphyseal plate, these
permanent synchondroses retain their hyaline cartilage and thus do not ossify with age. Due to the lack of
movement between the bone and cartilage, both temporary and permanent synchondroses are functionally
classified as a synarthrosis.
Symphysis
A cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage is called a symphysis (“growing together”).
Fibrocartilage is very strong because it contains numerous bundles of thick collagen fibers, thus giving it a much
greater ability to resist pulling and bending forces when compared with hyaline cartilage. This gives symphyses the
ability to strongly unite the adjacent bones, but can still allow for limited movement to occur. Thus, a symphysis is
functionally classified as an amphiarthrosis.
The gap separating the bones at a symphysis may be narrow or wide. Examples in which the gap between the bones
is narrow include the pubic symphysis and the manubriosternal joint. At the pubic symphysis, the pubic portions of
the right and left hip bones of the pelvis are joined together by fibrocartilage across a narrow gap. Similarly, at the
manubriosternal joint, fibrocartilage unites the manubrium and body portions of the sternum.
The intervertebral symphysis is a wide symphysis located between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae of the vertebral
column. Here a thick pad of fibrocartilage called an intervertebral disc strongly unites the adjacent vertebrae by
filling the gap between them. The width of the intervertebral symphysis is important because it allows for small
movements between the adjacent vertebrae. In addition, the thick intervertebral disc provides cushioning between
the vertebrae, which is important when carrying heavy objects or during high-impact activities such as running or
jumping.
9.4 Synovial Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structural features of a synovial joint
•
Discuss the function of additional structures associated with synovial joints
•
List the six types of synovial joints and give an example of each
Synovial joints are the most common type of joint in the body (Figure 9.8). A key structural characteristic for a
synovial joint that is not seen at fibrous or cartilaginous joints is the presence of a joint cavity. This fluid-filled space
is the site at which the articulating surfaces of the bones contact each other. Also unlike fibrous or cartilaginous
joints, the articulating bone surfaces at a synovial joint are not directly connected to each other with fibrous
connective tissue or cartilage. This gives the bones of a synovial joint the ability to move smoothly against each
other, allowing for increased joint mobility.
320
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.8
Synovial Joints
Synovial joints allow for smooth movements between the adjacent bones. The joint is surrounded by an
articular capsule that defines a joint cavity filled with synovial fluid. The articulating surfaces of the bones are covered by a thin layer of
articular cartilage. Ligaments support the joint by holding the bones together and resisting excess or abnormal joint motions.
Structural Features of Synovial Joints
Synovial joints are characterized by the presence of a joint cavity. The walls of this space are formed by the articular
capsule, a fibrous connective tissue structure that is attached to each bone just outside the area of the bone’s
articulating surface. The bones of the joint articulate with each other within the joint cavity.
Friction between the bones at a synovial joint is prevented by the presence of the articular cartilage, a thin layer of
hyaline cartilage that covers the entire articulating surface of each bone. However, unlike at a cartilaginous joint, the
articular cartilages of each bone are not continuous with each other. Instead, the articular cartilage acts like a
Teflon® coating over the bone surface, allowing the articulating bones to move smoothly against each other without
damaging the underlying bone tissue. Lining the inner surface of the articular capsule is a thin synovial membrane.
The cells of this membrane secrete synovial fluid (synovia = “a thick fluid”), a thick, slimy fluid that provides
lubrication to further reduce friction between the bones of the joint. This fluid also provides nourishment to the
articular cartilage, which does not contain blood vessels. The ability of the bones to move smoothly against each
other within the joint cavity, and the freedom of joint movement this provides, means that each synovial joint is
functionally classified as a diarthrosis.
Outside of their articulating surfaces, the bones are connected together by ligaments, which are strong bands of
fibrous connective tissue. These strengthen and support the joint by anchoring the bones together and preventing
their separation. Ligaments allow for normal movements at a joint, but limit the range of these motions, thus
preventing excessive or abnormal joint movements. Ligaments are classified based on their relationship to the
fibrous articular capsule. An extrinsic ligament is located outside of the articular capsule, an intrinsic ligament is
fused to or incorporated into the wall of the articular capsule, and an intracapsular ligament is located inside of the
articular capsule.
At many synovial joints, additional support is provided by the muscles and their tendons that act across the joint. A
tendon is the dense connective tissue structure that attaches a muscle to bone. As forces acting on a joint increase,
9.4 • Synovial Joints
321
the body will automatically increase the overall strength of contraction of the muscles crossing that joint, thus
allowing the muscle and its tendon to serve as a “dynamic ligament” to resist forces and support the joint. This type
of indirect support by muscles is very important at the shoulder joint, for example, where the ligaments are
relatively weak.
Additional Structures Associated with Synovial Joints
A few synovial joints of the body have a fibrocartilage structure located between the articulating bones. This is
called an articular disc, which is generally small and oval-shaped, or a meniscus, which is larger and C-shaped.
These structures can serve several functions, depending on the specific joint. In some places, an articular disc may
act to strongly unite the bones of the joint to each other. Examples of this include the articular discs found at the
sternoclavicular joint or between the distal ends of the radius and ulna bones. At other synovial joints, the disc can
provide shock absorption and cushioning between the bones, which is the function of each meniscus within the
knee joint. Finally, an articular disc can serve to smooth the movements between the articulating bones, as seen at
the temporomandibular joint. Some synovial joints also have a fat pad, which can serve as a cushion between the
bones.
Additional structures located outside of a synovial joint serve to prevent friction between the bones of the joint and
the overlying muscle tendons or skin. A bursa (plural = bursae) is a thin connective tissue sac filled with lubricating
liquid. They are located in regions where skin, ligaments, muscles, or muscle tendons can rub against each other,
usually near a body joint (Figure 9.9). Bursae reduce friction by separating the adjacent structures, preventing them
from rubbing directly against each other. Bursae are classified by their location. A subcutaneous bursa is located
between the skin and an underlying bone. It allows skin to move smoothly over the bone. Examples include the
prepatellar bursa located over the kneecap and the olecranon bursa at the tip of the elbow. A submuscular bursa is
found between a muscle and an underlying bone, or between adjacent muscles. These prevent rubbing of the
muscle during movements. A large submuscular bursa, the trochanteric bursa, is found at the lateral hip, between
the greater trochanter of the femur and the overlying gluteus maximus muscle. A subtendinous bursa is found
between a tendon and a bone. Examples include the subacromial bursa that protects the tendon of shoulder muscle
as it passes under the acromion of the scapula, and the suprapatellar bursa that separates the tendon of the large
anterior thigh muscle from the distal femur just above the knee.
FIGURE 9.9
Bursae
Bursae are fluid-filled sacs that serve to prevent friction between skin, muscle, or tendon and an underlying bone.
Three major bursae and a fat pad are part of the complex joint that unites the femur and tibia of the leg.
A tendon sheath is similar in structure to a bursa, but smaller. It is a connective tissue sac that surrounds a muscle
tendon at places where the tendon crosses a joint. It contains a lubricating fluid that allows for smooth motions of
the tendon during muscle contraction and joint movements.
322
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Bursitis
Bursitis is the inflammation of a bursa near a joint. This will cause pain, swelling, or tenderness of the bursa and
surrounding area, and may also result in joint stiffness. Bursitis is most commonly associated with the bursae found
at or near the shoulder, hip, knee, or elbow joints. At the shoulder, subacromial bursitis may occur in the bursa that
separates the acromion of the scapula from the tendon of a shoulder muscle as it passes deep to the acromion. In
the hip region, trochanteric bursitis can occur in the bursa that overlies the greater trochanter of the femur, just
below the lateral side of the hip. Ischial bursitis occurs in the bursa that separates the skin from the ischial
tuberosity of the pelvis, the bony structure that is weight bearing when sitting. At the knee, inflammation and
swelling of the bursa located between the skin and patella bone is prepatellar bursitis (“housemaid’s knee”), a
condition more commonly seen today in roofers or floor and carpet installers who do not use knee pads. At the
elbow, olecranon bursitis is inflammation of the bursa between the skin and olecranon process of the ulna. The
olecranon forms the bony tip of the elbow, and bursitis here is also known as “student’s elbow.”
Bursitis can be either acute (lasting only a few days) or chronic. It can arise from muscle overuse, trauma, excessive
or prolonged pressure on the skin, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, or infection of the joint. Repeated acute episodes of
bursitis can result in a chronic condition. Treatments for the disorder include antibiotics if the bursitis is caused by
an infection, or anti-inflammatory agents, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or corticosteroids
if the bursitis is due to trauma or overuse. Chronic bursitis may require that fluid be drained, but additional surgery is
usually not required.
Types of Synovial Joints
Synovial joints are subdivided based on the shapes of the articulating surfaces of the bones that form each joint. The
six types of synovial joints are pivot, hinge, condyloid, saddle, plane, and ball-and socket-joints (Figure 9.10).
9.4 • Synovial Joints
323
FIGURE 9.10
Types of Synovial Joints
The six types of synovial joints allow the body to move in a variety of ways. (a) Pivot joints allow
for rotation around an axis, such as between the first and second cervical vertebrae, which allows for side-to-side rotation of the head. (b)
The hinge joint of the elbow works like a door hinge. (c) The articulation between the trapezium carpal bone and the first metacarpal bone
at the base of the thumb is a saddle joint. (d) Plane joints, such as those between the tarsal bones of the foot, allow for limited gliding
movements between bones. (e) The radiocarpal joint of the wrist is a condyloid joint. (f) The hip and shoulder joints are the only ball-and-
socket joints of the body.
Pivot Joint
At a pivot joint, a rounded portion of a bone is enclosed within a ring formed partially by the articulation with
another bone and partially by a ligament (see Figure 9.10a). The bone rotates within this ring. Since the rotation is
around a single axis, pivot joints are functionally classified as a uniaxial diarthrosis type of joint. An example of a
pivot joint is the atlantoaxial joint, found between the C1 (atlas) and C2 (axis) vertebrae. Here, the upward projecting
dens of the axis articulates with the inner aspect of the atlas, where it is held in place by a ligament. Rotation at this
324
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
joint allows you to turn your head from side to side. A second pivot joint is found at the proximal radioulnar joint.
Here, the head of the radius is largely encircled by a ligament that holds it in place as it articulates with the radial
notch of the ulna. Rotation of the radius allows for forearm movements.
Hinge Joint
In a hinge joint, the convex end of one bone articulates with the concave end of the adjoining bone (see Figure
9.10b). This type of joint allows only for bending and straightening motions along a single axis, and thus hinge joints
are functionally classified as uniaxial joints. A good example is the elbow joint, with the articulation between the
trochlea of the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna. Other hinge joints of the body include the knee, ankle,
and interphalangeal joints between the phalanx bones of the fingers and toes.
Condyloid Joint
At a condyloid joint (ellipsoid joint), the shallow depression at the end of one bone articulates with a rounded
structure from an adjacent bone or bones (see Figure 9.10e). The knuckle (metacarpophalangeal) joints of the hand
between the distal end of a metacarpal bone and the proximal phalanx bone are condyloid joints. Another example
is the radiocarpal joint of the wrist, between the shallow depression at the distal end of the radius bone and the
rounded scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum carpal bones. In this case, the articulation area has a more oval (elliptical)
shape. Functionally, condyloid joints are biaxial joints that allow for two planes of movement. One movement
involves the bending and straightening of the fingers or the anterior-posterior movements of the hand. The second
movement is a side-to-side movement, which allows you to spread your fingers apart and bring them together, or to
move your hand in a medial-going or lateral-going direction.
Saddle Joint
At a saddle joint, both of the articulating surfaces for the bones have a saddle shape, which is concave in one
direction and convex in the other (see Figure 9.10c). This allows the two bones to fit together like a rider sitting on a
saddle. Saddle joints are functionally classified as biaxial joints. The primary example is the first carpometacarpal
joint, between the trapezium (a carpal bone) and the first metacarpal bone at the base of the thumb. This joint
provides the thumb the ability to move away from the palm of the hand along two planes. Thus, the thumb can move
within the same plane as the palm of the hand, or it can jut out anteriorly, perpendicular to the palm. This movement
of the first carpometacarpal joint is what gives humans their distinctive “opposable” thumbs. The sternoclavicular
joint is also classified as a saddle joint.
Plane Joint
At a plane joint (gliding joint), the articulating surfaces of the bones are flat or slightly curved and of approximately
the same size, which allows the bones to slide against each other (see Figure 9.10d). The motion at this type of joint
is usually small and tightly constrained by surrounding ligaments. Based only on their shape, plane joints can allow
multiple movements, including rotation. Thus plane joints can be functionally classified as a multiaxial joint.
However, not all of these movements are available to every plane joint due to limitations placed on it by ligaments or
neighboring bones. Thus, depending upon the specific joint of the body, a plane joint may exhibit only a single type
of movement or several movements. Plane joints are found between the carpal bones (intercarpal joints) of the wrist
or tarsal bones (intertarsal joints) of the foot, between the clavicle and acromion of the scapula (acromioclavicular
joint), and between the superior and inferior articular processes of adjacent vertebrae (zygapophysial joints).
Ball-and-Socket Joint
The joint with the greatest range of motion is the ball-and-socket joint. At these joints, the rounded head of one
bone (the ball) fits into the concave articulation (the socket) of the adjacent bone (see Figure 9.10f). The hip joint
and the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint are the only ball-and-socket joints of the body. At the hip joint, the head of the
femur articulates with the acetabulum of the hip bone, and at the shoulder joint, the head of the humerus articulates
with the glenoid cavity of the scapula.
Ball-and-socket joints are classified functionally as multiaxial joints. The femur and the humerus are able to move in
both anterior-posterior and medial-lateral directions and they can also rotate around their long axis. The shallow
socket formed by the glenoid cavity allows the shoulder joint an extensive range of motion. In contrast, the deep
socket of the acetabulum and the strong supporting ligaments of the hip joint serve to constrain movements of the
femur, reflecting the need for stability and weight-bearing ability at the hip.
9.4 • Synovial Joints
325
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/synjoints) to see an animation of synovial joints in action. Synovial joints are
places where bones articulate with each other inside of a joint cavity. The different types of synovial joints are the
ball-and-socket joint (shoulder joint), hinge joint (knee), pivot joint (atlantoaxial joint, between C1 and C2 vertebrae
of the neck), condyloid joint (radiocarpal joint of the wrist), saddle joint (first carpometacarpal joint, between the
trapezium carpal bone and the first metacarpal bone, at the base of the thumb), and plane joint (facet joints of
vertebral column, between superior and inferior articular processes). Which type of synovial joint allows for the
widest range of motion?
Aging and the...
Joints
Arthritis is a common disorder of synovial joints that involves inflammation of the joint. This often results in
significant joint pain, along with swelling, stiffness, and reduced joint mobility. There are more than 100 different
forms of arthritis. Arthritis may arise from aging, damage to the articular cartilage, autoimmune diseases,
bacterial or viral infections, or unknown (probably genetic) causes.
The most common type of arthritis is osteoarthritis, which is associated with aging and “wear and tear” of the
articular cartilage (Figure 9.11). Risk factors that may lead to osteoarthritis later in life include injury to a joint;
jobs that involve physical labor; sports with running, twisting, or throwing actions; and being overweight. These
factors put stress on the articular cartilage that covers the surfaces of bones at synovial joints, causing the
cartilage to gradually become thinner. As the articular cartilage layer wears down, more pressure is placed on
the bones. The joint responds by increasing production of the lubricating synovial fluid, but this can lead to
swelling of the joint cavity, causing pain and joint stiffness as the articular capsule is stretched. The bone tissue
underlying the damaged articular cartilage also responds by thickening, producing irregularities and causing the
articulating surface of the bone to become rough or bumpy. Joint movement then results in pain and
inflammation. In its early stages, symptoms of osteoarthritis may be reduced by mild activity that “warms up”
the joint, but the symptoms may worsen following exercise. In individuals with more advanced osteoarthritis,
the affected joints can become more painful and therefore are difficult to use effectively, resulting in increased
immobility. There is no cure for osteoarthritis, but several treatments can help alleviate the pain. Treatments
may include lifestyle changes, such as weight loss and low-impact exercise, and over-the-counter or
prescription medications that help to alleviate the pain and inflammation. For severe cases, joint replacement
surgery (arthroplasty) may be required.
Joint replacement is a very invasive procedure, so other treatments are always tried before surgery. However
arthroplasty can provide relief from chronic pain and can enhance mobility within a few months following the
surgery. This type of surgery involves replacing the articular surfaces of the bones with prosthesis (artificial
components). For example, in hip arthroplasty, the worn or damaged parts of the hip joint, including the head
and neck of the femur and the acetabulum of the pelvis, are removed and replaced with artificial joint
components. The replacement head for the femur consists of a rounded ball attached to the end of a shaft that
is inserted inside the diaphysis of the femur. The acetabulum of the pelvis is reshaped and a replacement socket
is fitted into its place. The parts, which are always built in advance of the surgery, are sometimes custom made
to produce the best possible fit for a patient.
Gout is a form of arthritis that results from the deposition of uric acid crystals within a body joint. Usually only
one or a few joints are affected, such as the big toe, knee, or ankle. The attack may only last a few days, but may
return to the same or another joint. Gout occurs when the body makes too much uric acid or the kidneys do not
properly excrete it. A diet with excessive fructose has been implicated in raising the chances of a susceptible
individual developing gout.
Other forms of arthritis are associated with various autoimmune diseases, bacterial infections of the joint, or
unknown genetic causes. Autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, or systemic lupus
erythematosus, produce arthritis because the immune system of the body attacks the body joints. In
326
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/gout) to learn about a patient who arrives at the hospital with joint pain and
weakness in his legs. What caused this patient’s weakness?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/hipreplace) to observe hip replacement surgery (total hip arthroplasty),
which can be used to alleviate the pain and loss of joint mobility associated with osteoarthritis of the hip joint. What
is the most common cause of hip disability?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/rheuarthritis) to learn about the symptoms and treatments for rheumatoid
arthritis. Which system of the body malfunctions in rheumatoid arthritis and what does this cause?
9.5 Types of Body Movements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define the different types of body movements
•
Identify the joints that allow for these motions
Synovial joints allow the body a tremendous range of movements. Each movement at a synovial joint results from
the contraction or relaxation of the muscles that are attached to the bones on either side of the articulation. The
type of movement that can be produced at a synovial joint is determined by its structural type. While the ball-and-
socket joint gives the greatest range of movement at an individual joint, in other regions of the body, several joints
may work together to produce a particular movement. Overall, each type of synovial joint is necessary to provide the
body with its great flexibility and mobility. There are many types of movement that can occur at synovial joints (Table
9.1). Movement types are generally paired, with one being the opposite of the other. Body movements are always
rheumatoid arthritis, the joint capsule and synovial membrane become inflamed. As the disease progresses, the
articular cartilage is severely damaged or destroyed, resulting in joint deformation, loss of movement, and
severe disability. The most commonly involved joints are the hands, feet, and cervical spine, with corresponding
joints on both sides of the body usually affected, though not always to the same extent. Rheumatoid arthritis is
also associated with lung fibrosis, vasculitis (inflammation of blood vessels), coronary heart disease, and
premature mortality. With no known cure, treatments are aimed at alleviating symptoms. Exercise, anti-
inflammatory and pain medications, various specific disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs, or surgery are
used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.
FIGURE 9.11
Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis of a synovial joint results from aging or prolonged joint wear and tear. These cause
erosion and loss of the articular cartilage covering the surfaces of the bones, resulting in inflammation that causes joint stiffness and
pain.
9.5 • Types of Body Movements
327
described in relation to the anatomical position of the body: upright stance, with upper limbs to the side of body and
palms facing forward. Refer to Figure 9.12 as you go through this section.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/anatomical) to learn about anatomical motions. What motions involve
increasing or decreasing the angle of the foot at the ankle?
FIGURE 9.12
Movements of the Body, Part 1
Synovial joints give the body many ways in which to move. (a)–(b) Flexion and extension
motions are in the sagittal (anterior–posterior) plane of motion. These movements take place at the shoulder, hip, elbow, knee, wrist,
metacarpophalangeal, metatarsophalangeal, and interphalangeal joints. (c)–(d) Anterior bending of the head or vertebral column is flexion,
while any posterior-going movement is extension. (e) Abduction and adduction are motions of the limbs, hand, fingers, or toes in the
coronal (medial–lateral) plane of movement. Moving the limb or hand laterally away from the body, or spreading the fingers or toes, is
abduction. Adduction brings the limb or hand toward or across the midline of the body, or brings the fingers or toes together. Circumduction
is the movement of the limb, hand, or fingers in a circular pattern, using the sequential combination of flexion, adduction, extension, and
abduction motions. Adduction/abduction and circumduction take place at the shoulder, hip, wrist, metacarpophalangeal, and
metatarsophalangeal joints. (f) Turning of the head side to side or twisting of the body is rotation. Medial and lateral rotation of the upper
limb at the shoulder or lower limb at the hip involves turning the anterior surface of the limb toward the midline of the body (medial or
328
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
internal rotation) or away from the midline (lateral or external rotation).
FIGURE 9.13
Movements of the Body, Part 2
(g) Supination of the forearm turns the hand to the palm forward position in which the
radius and ulna are parallel, while forearm pronation turns the hand to the palm backward position in which the radius crosses over the
ulna to form an "X." (h) Dorsiflexion of the foot at the ankle joint moves the top of the foot toward the leg, while plantar flexion lifts the heel
and points the toes. (i) Eversion of the foot moves the bottom (sole) of the foot away from the midline of the body, while foot inversion faces
the sole toward the midline. (j) Protraction of the mandible pushes the chin forward, and retraction pulls the chin back. (k) Depression of
the mandible opens the mouth, while elevation closes it. (l) Opposition of the thumb brings the tip of the thumb into contact with the tip of
the fingers of the same hand and reposition brings the thumb back next to the index finger.
Flexion and Extension
Flexion and extension are typically movements that take place within the sagittal plane and involve anterior or
posterior movements of the neck, trunk, or limbs. For the vertebral column, flexion (anterior flexion) is an anterior
(forward) bending of the neck or trunk, while extension involves a posterior-directed motion, such as straightening
from a flexed position or bending backward. Lateral flexion of the vertebral column occurs in the coronal plane and
is defined as the bending of the neck or trunk toward the right or left side. These movements of the vertebral column
involve both the symphysis joint formed by each intervertebral disc, as well as the plane type of synovial joint
formed between the inferior articular processes of one vertebra and the superior articular processes of the next
lower vertebra.
In the limbs, flexion decreases the angle between the bones (bending of the joint), while extension increases the
angle and straightens the joint. For the upper limb, all anterior-going motions are flexion and all posterior-going
motions are extension. These include anterior-posterior movements of the arm at the shoulder, the forearm at the
9.5 • Types of Body Movements
329
elbow, the hand at the wrist, and the fingers at the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints. For the thumb,
extension moves the thumb away from the palm of the hand, within the same plane as the palm, while flexion brings
the thumb back against the index finger or into the palm. These motions take place at the first carpometacarpal
joint. In the lower limb, bringing the thigh forward and upward is flexion at the hip joint, while any posterior-going
motion of the thigh is extension. Note that extension of the thigh beyond the anatomical (standing) position is
greatly limited by the ligaments that support the hip joint. Knee flexion is the bending of the knee to bring the foot
toward the posterior thigh, and extension is the straightening of the knee. Flexion and extension movements are
seen at the hinge, condyloid, saddle, and ball-and-socket joints of the limbs (see Figure 9.12a-d).
Hyperextension is the abnormal or excessive extension of a joint beyond its normal range of motion, thus resulting
in injury. Similarly, hyperflexion is excessive flexion at a joint. Hyperextension injuries are common at hinge joints
such as the knee or elbow. In cases of “whiplash” in which the head is suddenly moved backward and then forward,
a patient may experience both hyperextension and hyperflexion of the cervical region.
Abduction and Adduction
Abduction and adduction motions occur within the coronal plane and involve medial-lateral motions of the limbs,
fingers, toes, or thumb. Abduction moves the limb laterally away from the midline of the body, while adduction is the
opposing movement that brings the limb toward the body or across the midline. For example, abduction is raising
the arm at the shoulder joint, moving it laterally away from the body, while adduction brings the arm down to the
side of the body. Similarly, abduction and adduction at the wrist moves the hand away from or toward the midline of
the body. Spreading the fingers or toes apart is also abduction, while bringing the fingers or toes together is
adduction. For the thumb, abduction is the anterior movement that brings the thumb to a 90° perpendicular
position, pointing straight out from the palm. Adduction moves the thumb back to the anatomical position, next to
the index finger. Abduction and adduction movements are seen at condyloid, saddle, and ball-and-socket joints (see
Figure 9.12e).
Circumduction
Circumduction is the movement of a body region in a circular manner, in which one end of the body region being
moved stays relatively stationary while the other end describes a circle. It involves the sequential combination of
flexion, adduction, extension, and abduction at a joint. This type of motion is found at biaxial condyloid and saddle
joints, and at multiaxial ball-and-sockets joints (see Figure 9.12e).
Rotation
Rotation can occur within the vertebral column, at a pivot joint, or at a ball-and-socket joint. Rotation of the neck or
body is the twisting movement produced by the summation of the small rotational movements available between
adjacent vertebrae. At a pivot joint, one bone rotates in relation to another bone. This is a uniaxial joint, and thus
rotation is the only motion allowed at a pivot joint. For example, at the atlantoaxial joint, the first cervical (C1)
vertebra (atlas) rotates around the dens, the upward projection from the second cervical (C2) vertebra (axis). This
allows the head to rotate from side to side as when shaking the head “no.” The proximal radioulnar joint is a pivot
joint formed by the head of the radius and its articulation with the ulna. This joint allows for the radius to rotate
along its length during pronation and supination movements of the forearm.
Rotation can also occur at the ball-and-socket joints of the shoulder and hip. Here, the humerus and femur rotate
around their long axis, which moves the anterior surface of the arm or thigh either toward or away from the midline
of the body. Movement that brings the anterior surface of the limb toward the midline of the body is called medial
(internal) rotation. Conversely, rotation of the limb so that the anterior surface moves away from the midline is
lateral (external) rotation (see Figure 9.12f). Be sure to distinguish medial and lateral rotation, which can only
occur at the multiaxial shoulder and hip joints, from circumduction, which can occur at either biaxial or multiaxial
joints.
Supination and Pronation
Supination and pronation are movements of the forearm. In the anatomical position, the upper limb is held next to
the body with the palm facing forward. This is the supinated position of the forearm. In this position, the radius and
ulna are parallel to each other. When the palm of the hand faces backward, the forearm is in the pronated position,
330
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
and the radius and ulna form an X-shape.
Supination and pronation are the movements of the forearm that go between these two positions. Pronation is the
motion that moves the forearm from the supinated (anatomical) position to the pronated (palm backward) position.
This motion is produced by rotation of the radius at the proximal radioulnar joint, accompanied by movement of the
radius at the distal radioulnar joint. The proximal radioulnar joint is a pivot joint that allows for rotation of the head of
the radius. Because of the slight curvature of the shaft of the radius, this rotation causes the distal end of the radius
to cross over the distal ulna at the distal radioulnar joint. This crossing over brings the radius and ulna into an X-
shape position. Supination is the opposite motion, in which rotation of the radius returns the bones to their parallel
positions and moves the palm to the anterior facing (supinated) position. It helps to remember that supination is the
motion you use when scooping up soup with a spoon (see Figure 9.13g).
Dorsiflexion and Plantar Flexion
Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion are movements at the ankle joint, which is a hinge joint. Lifting the front of the foot,
so that the top of the foot moves toward the anterior leg is dorsiflexion, while lifting the heel of the foot from the
ground or pointing the toes downward is plantar flexion. These are the only movements available at the ankle joint
(see Figure 9.13h).
Inversion and Eversion
Inversion and eversion are complex movements that involve the multiple plane joints among the tarsal bones of the
posterior foot (intertarsal joints) and thus are not motions that take place at the ankle joint. Inversion is the turning
of the foot to angle the bottom of the foot toward the midline, while eversion turns the bottom of the foot away from
the midline. The foot has a greater range of inversion than eversion motion. These are important motions that help
to stabilize the foot when walking or running on an uneven surface and aid in the quick side-to-side changes in
direction used during active sports such as basketball, racquetball, or soccer (see Figure 9.13i).
Protraction and Retraction
Protraction and retraction are anterior-posterior movements of the scapula or mandible. Protraction of the scapula
occurs when the shoulder is moved forward, as when pushing against something or throwing a ball. Retraction is the
opposite motion, with the scapula being pulled posteriorly and medially, toward the vertebral column. For the
mandible, protraction occurs when the lower jaw is pushed forward, to stick out the chin, while retraction pulls the
lower jaw backward. (See Figure 9.13j.)
Depression and Elevation
Depression and elevation are downward and upward movements of the scapula or mandible. The upward
movement of the scapula and shoulder is elevation, while a downward movement is depression. These movements
are used to shrug your shoulders. Similarly, elevation of the mandible is the upward movement of the lower jaw used
to close the mouth or bite on something, and depression is the downward movement that produces opening of the
mouth (see Figure 9.13k).
Excursion
Excursion is the side to side movement of the mandible. Lateral excursion moves the mandible away from the
midline, toward either the right or left side. Medial excursion returns the mandible to its resting position at the
midline.
Superior Rotation and Inferior Rotation
Superior and inferior rotation are movements of the scapula and are defined by the direction of movement of the
glenoid cavity. These motions involve rotation of the scapula around a point inferior to the scapular spine and are
produced by combinations of muscles acting on the scapula. During superior rotation, the glenoid cavity moves
upward as the medial end of the scapular spine moves downward. This is a very important motion that contributes
to upper limb abduction. Without superior rotation of the scapula, the greater tubercle of the humerus would hit the
acromion of the scapula, thus preventing any abduction of the arm above shoulder height. Superior rotation of the
scapula is thus required for full abduction of the upper limb. Superior rotation is also used without arm abduction
9.5 • Types of Body Movements
331
when carrying a heavy load with your hand or on your shoulder. You can feel this rotation when you pick up a load,
such as a heavy book bag and carry it on only one shoulder. To increase its weight-bearing support for the bag, the
shoulder lifts as the scapula superiorly rotates. Inferior rotation occurs during limb adduction and involves the
downward motion of the glenoid cavity with upward movement of the medial end of the scapular spine.
Opposition and Reposition
Opposition is the thumb movement that brings the tip of the thumb in contact with the tip of a finger. This
movement is produced at the first carpometacarpal joint, which is a saddle joint formed between the trapezium
carpal bone and the first metacarpal bone. Thumb opposition is produced by a combination of flexion and abduction
of the thumb at this joint. Returning the thumb to its anatomical position next to the index finger is called reposition
(see Figure 9.13l).
Movements of the Joints
Type of
Joint
Movement
Example
Pivot
Uniaxial joint; allows rotational movement
Atlantoaxial joint (C1–C2 vertebrae
articulation); proximal radioulnar joint
Hinge
Uniaxial joint; allows flexion/extension
movements
Knee; elbow; ankle; interphalangeal joints of
fingers and toes
Condyloid
Biaxial joint; allows flexion/extension, abduction/
adduction, and circumduction movements
Metacarpophalangeal (knuckle) joints of
fingers; radiocarpal joint of wrist;
metatarsophalangeal joints for toes
Saddle
Biaxial joint; allows flexion/extension, abduction/
adduction, and circumduction movements
First carpometacarpal joint of the thumb;
sternoclavicular joint
Plane
Multiaxial joint; allows inversion and eversion of
foot, or flexion, extension, and lateral flexion of
the vertebral column
Intertarsal joints of foot; superior-inferior
articular process articulations between
vertebrae
Ball-and-
socket
Multiaxial joint; allows flexion/extension,
abduction/adduction, circumduction, and medial/
lateral rotation movements
Shoulder and hip joints
TABLE 9.1
9.6 Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the bones that articulate together to form selected synovial joints
•
Discuss the movements available at each joint
•
Describe the structures that support and prevent excess movements at each joint
Each synovial joint of the body is specialized to perform certain movements. The movements that are allowed are
determined by the structural classification for each joint. For example, a multiaxial ball-and-socket joint has much
more mobility than a uniaxial hinge joint. However, the ligaments and muscles that support a joint may place
restrictions on the total range of motion available. Thus, the ball-and-socket joint of the shoulder has little in the
way of ligament support, which gives the shoulder a very large range of motion. In contrast, movements at the hip
joint are restricted by strong ligaments, which reduce its range of motion but confer stability during standing and
332
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
weight bearing.
This section will examine the anatomy of selected synovial joints of the body. Anatomical names for most joints are
derived from the names of the bones that articulate at that joint, although some joints, such as the elbow, hip, and
knee joints are exceptions to this general naming scheme.
Articulations of the Vertebral Column
In addition to being held together by the intervertebral discs, adjacent vertebrae also articulate with each other at
synovial joints formed between the superior and inferior articular processes called zygapophysial joints (facet
joints) (see Figure 9.3). These are plane joints that provide for only limited motions between the vertebrae. The
orientation of the articular processes at these joints varies in different regions of the vertebral column and serves to
determine the types of motions available in each vertebral region. The cervical and lumbar regions have the greatest
ranges of motions.
In the neck, the articular processes of cervical vertebrae are flattened and generally face upward or downward. This
orientation provides the cervical vertebral column with extensive ranges of motion for flexion, extension, lateral
flexion, and rotation. In the thoracic region, the downward projecting and overlapping spinous processes, along with
the attached thoracic cage, greatly limit flexion, extension, and lateral flexion. However, the flattened and vertically
positioned thoracic articular processes allow for the greatest range of rotation within the vertebral column. The
lumbar region allows for considerable extension, flexion, and lateral flexion, but the orientation of the articular
processes largely prohibits rotation.
The articulations formed between the skull, the atlas (C1 vertebra), and the axis (C2 vertebra) differ from the
articulations in other vertebral areas and play important roles in movement of the head. The atlanto-occipital joint
is formed by the articulations between the superior articular processes of the atlas and the occipital condyles on the
base of the skull. This articulation has a pronounced U-shaped curvature, oriented along the anterior-posterior axis.
This allows the skull to rock forward and backward, producing flexion and extension of the head. This moves the
head up and down, as when shaking your head “yes.”
The atlantoaxial joint, between the atlas and axis, consists of three articulations. The paired superior articular
processes of the axis articulate with the inferior articular processes of the atlas. These articulating surfaces are
relatively flat and oriented horizontally. The third articulation is the pivot joint formed between the dens, which
projects upward from the body of the axis, and the inner aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas (Figure 9.14). A
strong ligament passes posterior to the dens to hold it in position against the anterior arch. These articulations allow
the atlas to rotate on top of the axis, moving the head toward the right or left, as when shaking your head “no.”
FIGURE 9.14
Atlantoaxial Joint
The atlantoaxial joint is a pivot type of joint between the dens portion of the axis (C2 vertebra) and the
anterior arch of the atlas (C1 vertebra), with the dens held in place by a ligament.
Temporomandibular Joint
The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is the joint that allows for opening (mandibular depression) and closing
(mandibular elevation) of the mouth, as well as side-to-side and protraction/retraction motions of the lower jaw.
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
333
This joint involves the articulation between the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone, with
the condyle (head) of the mandible. Located between these bony structures, filling the gap between the skull and
mandible, is a flexible articular disc (Figure 9.15). This disc serves to smooth the movements between the temporal
bone and mandibular condyle.
Movement at the TMJ during opening and closing of the mouth involves both gliding and hinge motions of the
mandible. With the mouth closed, the mandibular condyle and articular disc are located within the mandibular fossa
of the temporal bone. During opening of the mouth, the mandible hinges downward and at the same time is pulled
anteriorly, causing both the condyle and the articular disc to glide forward from the mandibular fossa onto the
downward projecting articular tubercle. The net result is a forward and downward motion of the condyle and
mandibular depression. The temporomandibular joint is supported by an extrinsic ligament that anchors the
mandible to the skull. This ligament spans the distance between the base of the skull and the lingula on the medial
side of the mandibular ramus.
Dislocation of the TMJ may occur when opening the mouth too wide (such as when taking a large bite) or following a
blow to the jaw, resulting in the mandibular condyle moving beyond (anterior to) the articular tubercle. In this case,
the individual would not be able to close their mouth. Temporomandibular joint disorder is a painful condition that
may arise due to arthritis, wearing of the articular cartilage covering the bony surfaces of the joint, muscle fatigue
from overuse or grinding of the teeth, damage to the articular disc within the joint, or jaw injury. Temporomandibular
joint disorders can also cause headache, difficulty chewing, or even the inability to move the jaw (lock jaw).
Pharmacologic agents for pain or other therapies, including bite guards, are used as treatments.
FIGURE 9.15
Temporomandibular Joint
The temporomandibular joint is the articulation between the temporal bone of the skull and
the condyle of the mandible, with an articular disc located between these bones. During depression of the mandible (opening of the
mouth), the mandibular condyle moves both forward and hinges downward as it travels from the mandibular fossa onto the articular
tubercle.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/TMJ) to learn about TMJ. Opening of the mouth requires the combination of
two motions at the temporomandibular joint, an anterior gliding motion of the articular disc and mandible and the
downward hinging of the mandible. What is the initial movement of the mandible during opening and how much
mouth opening does this produce?
334
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
Shoulder Joint
The shoulder joint is called the glenohumeral joint. This is a ball-and-socket joint formed by the articulation
between the head of the humerus and the glenoid cavity of the scapula (Figure 9.16). This joint has the largest range
of motion of any joint in the body. However, this freedom of movement is due to the lack of structural support and
thus the enhanced mobility is offset by a loss of stability.
FIGURE 9.16
Glenohumeral Joint
The glenohumeral (shoulder) joint is a ball-and-socket joint that provides the widest range of
motions. It has a loose articular capsule and is supported by ligaments and the rotator cuff muscles.
The large range of motions at the shoulder joint is provided by the articulation of the large, rounded humeral head
with the small and shallow glenoid cavity, which is only about one third of the size of the humeral head. The socket
formed by the glenoid cavity is deepened slightly by a small lip of fibrocartilage called the glenoid labrum, which
extends around the outer margin of the cavity. The articular capsule that surrounds the glenohumeral joint is
relatively thin and loose to allow for large motions of the upper limb. Some structural support for the joint is
provided by thickenings of the articular capsule wall that form weak intrinsic ligaments. These include the
coracohumeral ligament, running from the coracoid process of the scapula to the anterior humerus, and three
ligaments, each called a glenohumeral ligament, located on the anterior side of the articular capsule. These
ligaments help to strengthen the superior and anterior capsule walls.
However, the primary support for the shoulder joint is provided by muscles crossing the joint, particularly the four
rotator cuff muscles. These muscles (supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis) arise from the
scapula and attach to the greater or lesser tubercles of the humerus. As these muscles cross the shoulder joint,
their tendons encircle the head of the humerus and become fused to the anterior, superior, and posterior walls of
the articular capsule. The thickening of the capsule formed by the fusion of these four muscle tendons is called the
rotator cuff. Two bursae, the subacromial bursa and the subscapular bursa, help to prevent friction between the
rotator cuff muscle tendons and the scapula as these tendons cross the glenohumeral joint. In addition to their
individual actions of moving the upper limb, the rotator cuff muscles also serve to hold the head of the humerus in
position within the glenoid cavity. By constantly adjusting their strength of contraction to resist forces acting on the
shoulder, these muscles serve as “dynamic ligaments” and thus provide the primary structural support for the
glenohumeral joint.
Injuries to the shoulder joint are common. Repetitive use of the upper limb, particularly in abduction such as during
throwing, swimming, or racquet sports, may lead to acute or chronic inflammation of the bursa or muscle tendons, a
tear of the glenoid labrum, or degeneration or tears of the rotator cuff. Because the humeral head is strongly
supported by muscles and ligaments around its anterior, superior, and posterior aspects, most dislocations of the
humerus occur in an inferior direction. This can occur when force is applied to the humerus when the upper limb is
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
335
fully abducted, as when diving to catch a baseball and landing on your hand or elbow. Inflammatory responses to
any shoulder injury can lead to the formation of scar tissue between the articular capsule and surrounding
structures, thus reducing shoulder mobility, a condition called adhesive capsulitis (“frozen shoulder”).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/shoulderjoint1) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the shoulder joint. What
movements are available at the shoulder joint?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/shoulderjoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of the shoulder joint,
including bones, joints, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. What is the shape of the glenoid labrum in cross-
section, and what is the importance of this shape?
Elbow Joint
The elbow joint is a uniaxial hinge joint formed by the humeroulnar joint, the articulation between the trochlea of
the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna. Also associated with the elbow are the humeroradial joint and the
proximal radioulnar joint. All three of these joints are enclosed within a single articular capsule (Figure 9.17).
The articular capsule of the elbow is thin on its anterior and posterior aspects, but is thickened along its outside
margins by strong intrinsic ligaments. These ligaments prevent side-to-side movements and hyperextension. On the
medial side is the triangular ulnar collateral ligament. This arises from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and
attaches to the medial side of the proximal ulna. The strongest part of this ligament is the anterior portion, which
resists hyperextension of the elbow. The ulnar collateral ligament may be injured by frequent, forceful extensions of
the forearm, as is seen in baseball pitchers. Reconstructive surgical repair of this ligament is referred to as Tommy
John surgery, named for the former major league pitcher who was the first person to have this treatment.
The lateral side of the elbow is supported by the radial collateral ligament. This arises from the lateral epicondyle
of the humerus and then blends into the lateral side of the annular ligament. The annular ligament encircles the
head of the radius. This ligament supports the head of the radius as it articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at
the proximal radioulnar joint. This is a pivot joint that allows for rotation of the radius during supination and
pronation of the forearm.
336
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.17
Elbow Joint
(a) The elbow is a hinge joint that allows only for flexion and extension of the forearm. (b) It is supported by
the ulnar and radial collateral ligaments. (c) The annular ligament supports the head of the radius at the proximal radioulnar joint, the pivot
joint that allows for rotation of the radius.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/elbowjoint1) to learn more about the anatomy of the elbow joint. Which
structures provide the main stability for the elbow?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/elbowjoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of the elbow joint, including
bones, joints, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. What are the functions of the articular cartilage?
Hip Joint
The hip joint is a multiaxial ball-and-socket joint between the head of the femur and the acetabulum of the hip bone
(Figure 9.18). The hip carries the weight of the body and thus requires strength and stability during standing and
walking. For these reasons, its range of motion is more limited than at the shoulder joint.
The acetabulum is the socket portion of the hip joint. This space is deep and has a large articulation area for the
femoral head, thus giving stability and weight bearing ability to the joint. The acetabulum is further deepened by the
acetabular labrum, a fibrocartilage lip attached to the outer margin of the acetabulum. The surrounding articular
capsule is strong, with several thickened areas forming intrinsic ligaments. These ligaments arise from the hip bone,
at the margins of the acetabulum, and attach to the femur at the base of the neck. The ligaments are the iliofemoral
ligament, pubofemoral ligament, and ischiofemoral ligament, all of which spiral around the head and neck of the
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
337
femur. The ligaments are tightened by extension at the hip, thus pulling the head of the femur tightly into the
acetabulum when in the upright, standing position. Very little additional extension of the thigh is permitted beyond
this vertical position. These ligaments thus stabilize the hip joint and allow you to maintain an upright standing
position with only minimal muscle contraction. Inside of the articular capsule, the ligament of the head of the
femur (ligamentum teres) spans between the acetabulum and femoral head. This intracapsular ligament is normally
slack and does not provide any significant joint support, but it does provide a pathway for an important artery that
supplies the head of the femur.
The hip is prone to osteoarthritis, and thus was the first joint for which a replacement prosthesis was developed. A
common injury in elderly individuals, particularly those with weakened bones due to osteoporosis, is a “broken hip,”
which is actually a fracture of the femoral neck. This may result from a fall, or it may cause the fall. This can happen
as one lower limb is taking a step and all of the body weight is placed on the other limb, causing the femoral neck to
break and producing a fall. Any accompanying disruption of the blood supply to the femoral neck or head can lead to
necrosis of these areas, resulting in bone and cartilage death. Femoral fractures usually require surgical treatment,
after which the patient will need mobility assistance for a prolonged period, either from family members or in a long-
term care facility. Consequentially, the associated health care costs of “broken hips” are substantial. In addition, hip
fractures are associated with increased rates of morbidity (incidences of disease) and mortality (death). Surgery for
a hip fracture followed by prolonged bed rest may lead to life-threatening complications, including pneumonia,
infection of pressure ulcers (bedsores), and thrombophlebitis (deep vein thrombosis; blood clot formation) that can
result in a pulmonary embolism (blood clot within the lung).
338
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.18
Hip Joint
(a) The ball-and-socket joint of the hip is a multiaxial joint that provides both stability and a wide range of
motion. (b–c) When standing, the supporting ligaments are tight, pulling the head of the femur into the acetabulum.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/hipjoint1) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the hip joint. What is a possible
consequence following a fracture of the femoral neck within the capsule of the hip joint?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/hipjoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of the hip joint, including bones,
joints, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. Where is the articular cartilage thickest within the hip joint?
Knee Joint
The knee joint is the largest joint of the body (Figure 9.19). It actually consists of three articulations. The
femoropatellar joint is found between the patella and the distal femur. The medial tibiofemoral joint and lateral
tibiofemoral joint are located between the medial and lateral condyles of the femur and the medial and lateral
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
339
condyles of the tibia. All of these articulations are enclosed within a single articular capsule. The knee functions as a
hinge joint, allowing flexion and extension of the leg. This action is generated by both rolling and gliding motions of
the femur on the tibia. In addition, some rotation of the leg is available when the knee is flexed, but not when
extended. The knee is well constructed for weight bearing in its extended position, but is vulnerable to injuries
associated with hyperextension, twisting, or blows to the medial or lateral side of the joint, particularly while weight
bearing.
At the femoropatellar joint, the patella slides vertically within a groove on the distal femur. The patella is a sesamoid
bone incorporated into the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle, the large muscle of the anterior thigh. The
patella serves to protect the quadriceps tendon from friction against the distal femur. Continuing from the patella to
the anterior tibia just below the knee is the patellar ligament. Acting via the patella and patellar ligament, the
quadriceps femoris is a powerful muscle that acts to extend the leg at the knee. It also serves as a “dynamic
ligament” to provide very important support and stabilization for the knee joint.
The medial and lateral tibiofemoral joints are the articulations between the rounded condyles of the femur and the
relatively flat condyles of the tibia. During flexion and extension motions, the condyles of the femur both roll and
glide over the surfaces of the tibia. The rolling action produces flexion or extension, while the gliding action serves to
maintain the femoral condyles centered over the tibial condyles, thus ensuring maximal bony, weight-bearing
support for the femur in all knee positions. As the knee comes into full extension, the femur undergoes a slight
medial rotation in relation to tibia. The rotation results because the lateral condyle of the femur is slightly smaller
than the medial condyle. Thus, the lateral condyle finishes its rolling motion first, followed by the medial condyle.
The resulting small medial rotation of the femur serves to “lock” the knee into its fully extended and most stable
position. Flexion of the knee is initiated by a slight lateral rotation of the femur on the tibia, which “unlocks” the
knee. This lateral rotation motion is produced by the popliteus muscle of the posterior leg.
Located between the articulating surfaces of the femur and tibia are two articular discs, the medial meniscus and
lateral meniscus (see Figure 9.19b). Each is a C-shaped fibrocartilage structure that is thin along its inside margin
and thick along the outer margin. They are attached to their tibial condyles, but do not attach to the femur. While
both menisci are free to move during knee motions, the medial meniscus shows less movement because it is
anchored at its outer margin to the articular capsule and tibial collateral ligament. The menisci provide padding
between the bones and help to fill the gap between the round femoral condyles and flattened tibial condyles. Some
areas of each meniscus lack an arterial blood supply and thus these areas heal poorly if damaged.
The knee joint has multiple ligaments that provide support, particularly in the extended position (see Figure 9.19c).
Outside of the articular capsule, located at the sides of the knee, are two extrinsic ligaments. The fibular collateral
ligament (lateral collateral ligament) is on the lateral side and spans from the lateral epicondyle of the femur to the
head of the fibula. The tibial collateral ligament (medial collateral ligament) of the medial knee runs from the
medial epicondyle of the femur to the medial tibia. As it crosses the knee, the tibial collateral ligament is firmly
attached on its deep side to the articular capsule and to the medial meniscus, an important factor when considering
knee injuries. In the fully extended knee position, both collateral ligaments are taut (tight), thus serving to stabilize
and support the extended knee and preventing side-to-side or rotational motions between the femur and tibia.
The articular capsule of the posterior knee is thickened by intrinsic ligaments that help to resist knee
hyperextension. Inside the knee are two intracapsular ligaments, the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior
cruciate ligament. These ligaments are anchored inferiorly to the tibia at the intercondylar eminence, the
roughened area between the tibial condyles. The cruciate ligaments are named for whether they are attached
anteriorly or posteriorly to this tibial region. Each ligament runs diagonally upward to attach to the inner aspect of a
femoral condyle. The cruciate ligaments are named for the X-shape formed as they pass each other (cruciate means
“cross”). The posterior cruciate ligament is the stronger ligament. It serves to support the knee when it is flexed and
weight bearing, as when walking downhill. In this position, the posterior cruciate ligament prevents the femur from
sliding anteriorly off the top of the tibia. The anterior cruciate ligament becomes tight when the knee is extended,
and thus resists hyperextension.
340
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 9.19
Knee Joint
(a) The knee joint is the largest joint of the body. (b)–(c) It is supported by the tibial and fibular collateral
ligaments located on the sides of the knee outside of the articular capsule, and the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments found inside
the capsule. The medial and lateral menisci provide padding and support between the femoral condyles and tibial condyles.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/flexext) to learn more about the flexion and extension of the knee, as the
femur both rolls and glides on the tibia to maintain stable contact between the bones in all knee positions. The
patella glides along a groove on the anterior side of the distal femur. The collateral ligaments on the sides of the
knee become tight in the fully extended position to help stabilize the knee. The posterior cruciate ligament supports
the knee when flexed and the anterior cruciate ligament becomes tight when the knee comes into full extension to
resist hyperextension. What are the ligaments that support the knee joint?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/kneejoint1) to learn more about the anatomy of the knee joint, including
bones, joints, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. Which ligament of the knee keeps the tibia from sliding too far
forward in relation to the femur and which ligament keeps the tibia from sliding too far backward?
Disorders of the...
Joints
Injuries to the knee are common. Since this joint is primarily supported by muscles and ligaments, injuries to any
of these structures will result in pain or knee instability. Injury to the posterior cruciate ligament occurs when
the knee is flexed and the tibia is driven posteriorly, such as falling and landing on the tibial tuberosity or hitting
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
341
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/kneeinjury) to learn more about different knee injuries and diagnostic testing
of the knee. What are the most common causes of anterior cruciate ligament injury?
Ankle and Foot Joints
The ankle is formed by the talocrural joint (Figure 9.21). It consists of the articulations between the talus bone of
the foot and the distal ends of the tibia and fibula of the leg (crural = “leg”). The superior aspect of the talus bone is
square-shaped and has three areas of articulation. The top of the talus articulates with the inferior tibia. This is the
portion of the ankle joint that carries the body weight between the leg and foot. The sides of the talus are firmly held
in position by the articulations with the medial malleolus of the tibia and the lateral malleolus of the fibula, which
the tibia on the dashboard when not wearing a seatbelt during an automobile accident. More commonly, injuries
occur when forces are applied to the extended knee, particularly when the foot is planted and unable to move.
Anterior cruciate ligament injuries can result with a forceful blow to the anterior knee, producing
hyperextension, or when a runner makes a quick change of direction that produces both twisting and
hyperextension of the knee.
A worse combination of injuries can occur with a hit to the lateral side of the extended knee (Figure 9.20). A
moderate blow to the lateral knee will cause the medial side of the joint to open, resulting in stretching or
damage to the tibial collateral ligament. Because the medial meniscus is attached to the tibial collateral
ligament, a stronger blow can tear the ligament and also damage the medial meniscus. This is one reason that
the medial meniscus is 20 times more likely to be injured than the lateral meniscus. A powerful blow to the
lateral knee produces a “terrible triad” injury, in which there is a sequential injury to the tibial collateral
ligament, medial meniscus, and anterior cruciate ligament.
Arthroscopic surgery has greatly improved the surgical treatment of knee injuries and reduced subsequent
recovery times. This procedure involves a small incision and the insertion into the joint of an arthroscope, a
pencil-thin instrument that allows for visualization of the joint interior. Small surgical instruments are also
inserted via additional incisions. These tools allow a surgeon to remove or repair a torn meniscus or to
reconstruct a ruptured cruciate ligament. The current method for anterior cruciate ligament replacement
involves using a portion of the patellar ligament. Holes are drilled into the cruciate ligament attachment points
on the tibia and femur, and the patellar ligament graft, with small areas of attached bone still intact at each end,
is inserted into these holes. The bone-to-bone sites at each end of the graft heal rapidly and strongly, thus
enabling a rapid recovery.
FIGURE 9.20
Knee Injury
A strong blow to the lateral side of the extended knee will cause three injuries, in sequence: tearing of
the tibial collateral ligament, damage to the medial meniscus, and rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament.
342
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
prevent any side-to-side motion of the talus. The ankle is thus a uniaxial hinge joint that allows only for dorsiflexion
and plantar flexion of the foot.
Additional joints between the tarsal bones of the posterior foot allow for the movements of foot inversion and
eversion. Most important for these movements is the subtalar joint, located between the talus and calcaneus
bones. The joints between the talus and navicular bones and the calcaneus and cuboid bones are also important
contributors to these movements. All of the joints between tarsal bones are plane joints. Together, the small
motions that take place at these joints all contribute to the production of inversion and eversion foot motions.
Like the hinge joints of the elbow and knee, the talocrural joint of the ankle is supported by several strong ligaments
located on the sides of the joint. These ligaments extend from the medial malleolus of the tibia or lateral malleolus
of the fibula and anchor to the talus and calcaneus bones. Since they are located on the sides of the ankle joint, they
allow for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the foot. They also prevent abnormal side-to-side and twisting
movements of the talus and calcaneus bones during eversion and inversion of the foot. On the medial side is the
broad deltoid ligament. The deltoid ligament supports the ankle joint and also resists excessive eversion of the
foot. The lateral side of the ankle has several smaller ligaments. These include the anterior talofibular ligament
and the posterior talofibular ligament, both of which span between the talus bone and the lateral malleolus of the
fibula, and the calcaneofibular ligament, located between the calcaneus bone and fibula. These ligaments support
the ankle and also resist excess inversion of the foot.
FIGURE 9.21
Ankle Joint
The talocrural (ankle) joint is a uniaxial hinge joint that only allows for dorsiflexion or plantar flexion of the
foot. Movements at the subtalar joint, between the talus and calcaneus bones, combined with motions at other intertarsal joints, enables
eversion/inversion movements of the foot. Ligaments that unite the medial or lateral malleolus with the talus and calcaneus bones serve to
support the talocrural joint and to resist excess eversion or inversion of the foot.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/anklejoint1) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the ankle joint. What are the
three ligaments found on the lateral side of the ankle joint?
9.6 • Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
343
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/anklejoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of the ankle joint, including
bones, joints, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. Which type of joint used in woodworking does the ankle joint
resemble?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/anklejoint3) to learn more about the ligaments of the ankle joint, ankle
sprains, and treatment. During an inversion ankle sprain injury, all three ligaments that resist excessive inversion of
the foot may be injured. What is the sequence in which these three ligaments are injured?
9.7 Development of Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the two processes by which mesenchyme can give rise to bone
•
Discuss the process by which joints of the limbs are formed
Joints form during embryonic development in conjunction with the formation and growth of the associated bones.
The embryonic tissue that gives rise to all bones, cartilages, and connective tissues of the body is called
mesenchyme. In the head, mesenchyme will accumulate at those areas that will become the bones that form the
top and sides of the skull. The mesenchyme in these areas will develop directly into bone through the process of
intramembranous ossification, in which mesenchymal cells differentiate into bone-producing cells that then
generate bone tissue. The mesenchyme between the areas of bone production will become the fibrous connective
tissue that fills the spaces between the developing bones. Initially, the connective tissue-filled gaps between the
bones are wide, and are called fontanelles. After birth, as the skull bones grow and enlarge, the gaps between them
decrease in width and the fontanelles are reduced to suture joints in which the bones are united by a narrow layer of
Disorders of the...
Joints
The ankle is the most frequently injured joint in the body, with the most common injury being an inversion ankle
sprain. A sprain is the stretching or tearing of the supporting ligaments. Excess inversion causes the talus bone
to tilt laterally, thus damaging the ligaments on the lateral side of the ankle. The anterior talofibular ligament is
most commonly injured, followed by the calcaneofibular ligament. In severe inversion injuries, the forceful
lateral movement of the talus not only ruptures the lateral ankle ligaments, but also fractures the distal fibula.
Less common are eversion sprains of the ankle, which involve stretching of the deltoid ligament on the medial
side of the ankle. Forcible eversion of the foot, for example, with an awkward landing from a jump or when a
football player has a foot planted and is hit on the lateral ankle, can result in a Pott’s fracture and dislocation of
the ankle joint. In this injury, the very strong deltoid ligament does not tear, but instead shears off the medial
malleolus of the tibia. This frees the talus, which moves laterally and fractures the distal fibula. In extreme
cases, the posterior margin of the tibia may also be sheared off.
Above the ankle, the distal ends of the tibia and fibula are united by a strong syndesmosis formed by the
interosseous membrane and ligaments at the distal tibiofibular joint. These connections prevent separation
between the distal ends of the tibia and fibula and maintain the talus locked into position between the medial
malleolus and lateral malleolus. Injuries that produce a lateral twisting of the leg on top of the planted foot can
result in stretching or tearing of the tibiofibular ligaments, producing a syndesmotic ankle sprain or “high ankle
sprain.”
Most ankle sprains can be treated using the RICE technique: Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation. Reducing
joint mobility using a brace or cast may be required for a period of time. More severe injuries involving ligament
tears or bone fractures may require surgery.
344
9 • Joints
Access for free at openstax.org
fibrous connective tissue.
The bones that form the base and facial regions of the skull develop through the process of endochondral
ossification. In this process, mesenchyme accumulates and differentiates into hyaline cartilage, which forms a
model of the future bone. The hyaline cartilage model is then gradually, over a period of many years, displaced by
bone. The mesenchyme between these developing bones becomes the fibrous connective tissue of the suture joints
between the bones in these regions of the skull.
A similar process of endochondral ossification gives rises to the bones and joints of the limbs. The limbs initially
develop as small limb buds that appear on the sides of the embryo around the end of the fourth week of
development. Starting during the sixth week, as each limb bud continues to grow and elongate, areas of
mesenchyme within the bud begin to differentiate into the hyaline cartilage that will form models for of each of the
future bones. The synovial joints will form between the adjacent cartilage models, in an area called the joint
interzone. Cells at the center of this interzone region undergo cell death to form the joint cavity, while surrounding
mesenchyme cells will form the articular capsule and supporting ligaments. The process of endochondral
ossification, which converts the cartilage models into bone, begins by the twelfth week of embryonic development.
At birth, ossification of much of the bone has occurred, but the hyaline cartilage of the epiphyseal plate will remain
throughout childhood and adolescence to allow for bone lengthening. Hyaline cartilage is also retained as the
articular cartilage that covers the surfaces of the bones at synovial joints.
9.7 • Development of Joints
345
Key Terms
abduction
movement in the coronal plane that moves
a limb laterally away from the body; spreading of the
fingers
acetabular labrum
lip of fibrocartilage that
surrounds outer margin of the acetabulum on the
hip bone
adduction
movement in the coronal plane that moves
a limb medially toward or across the midline of the
body; bringing fingers together
amphiarthrosis
slightly mobile joint
annular ligament
intrinsic ligament of the elbow
articular capsule that surrounds and supports the
head of the radius at the proximal radioulnar joint
anterior cruciate ligament
intracapsular ligament of
the knee; extends from anterior, superior surface of
the tibia to the inner aspect of the lateral condyle of
the femur; resists hyperextension of knee
anterior talofibular ligament
intrinsic ligament
located on the lateral side of the ankle joint,
between talus bone and lateral malleolus of fibula;
supports talus at the talocrural joint and resists
excess inversion of the foot
articular capsule
connective tissue structure that
encloses the joint cavity of a synovial joint
articular cartilage
thin layer of hyaline cartilage that
covers the articulating surfaces of bones at a
synovial joint
articular disc
meniscus; a fibrocartilage structure
found between the bones of some synovial joints;
provides padding or smooths movements between
the bones; strongly unites the bones together
articulation
joint of the body
atlanto-occipital joint
articulation between the
occipital condyles of the skull and the superior
articular processes of the atlas (C1 vertebra)
atlantoaxial joint
series of three articulations
between the atlas (C1) vertebra and the axis (C2)
vertebra, consisting of the joints between the
inferior articular processes of C1 and the superior
articular processes of C2, and the articulation
between the dens of C2 and the anterior arch of C1
ball-and-socket joint
synovial joint formed between
the spherical end of one bone (the ball) that fits into
the depression of a second bone (the socket); found
at the hip and shoulder joints; functionally classified
as a multiaxial joint
biaxial joint
type of diarthrosis; a joint that allows for
movements within two planes (two axes)
bursa
connective tissue sac containing lubricating
fluid that prevents friction between adjacent
structures, such as skin and bone, tendons and
bone, or between muscles
calcaneofibular ligament
intrinsic ligament located
on the lateral side of the ankle joint, between the
calcaneus bone and lateral malleolus of the fibula;
supports the talus bone at the ankle joint and
resists excess inversion of the foot
cartilaginous joint
joint at which the bones are
united by hyaline cartilage (synchondrosis) or
fibrocartilage (symphysis)
circumduction
circular motion of the arm, thigh,
hand, thumb, or finger that is produced by the
sequential combination of flexion, abduction,
extension, and adduction
condyloid joint
synovial joint in which the shallow
depression at the end of one bone receives a
rounded end from a second bone or a rounded
structure formed by two bones; found at the
metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers or the
radiocarpal joint of the wrist; functionally classified
as a biaxial joint
coracohumeral ligament
intrinsic ligament of the
shoulder joint; runs from the coracoid process of the
scapula to the anterior humerus
deltoid ligament
broad intrinsic ligament located on
the medial side of the ankle joint; supports the talus
at the talocrural joint and resists excess eversion of
the foot
depression
downward (inferior) motion of the
scapula or mandible
diarthrosis
freely mobile joint
dorsiflexion
movement at the ankle that brings the
top of the foot toward the anterior leg
elbow joint
humeroulnar joint
elevation
upward (superior) motion of the scapula or
mandible
eversion
foot movement involving the intertarsal
joints of the foot in which the bottom of the foot is
turned laterally, away from the midline
extension
movement in the sagittal plane that
increases the angle of a joint (straightens the joint);
motion involving posterior bending of the vertebral
column or returning to the upright position from a
flexed position
extrinsic ligament
ligament located outside of the
articular capsule of a synovial joint
femoropatellar joint
portion of the knee joint
consisting of the articulation between the distal
femur and the patella
fibrous joint
joint where the articulating areas of the
adjacent bones are connected by fibrous connective
tissue
fibular collateral ligament
extrinsic ligament of the
knee joint that spans from the lateral epicondyle of
346
9 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
the femur to the head of the fibula; resists
hyperextension and rotation of the extended knee
flexion
movement in the sagittal plane that
decreases the angle of a joint (bends the joint);
motion involving anterior bending of the vertebral
column
fontanelles
expanded areas of fibrous connective
tissue that separate the braincase bones of the skull
prior to birth and during the first year after birth
glenohumeral joint
shoulder joint; articulation
between the glenoid cavity of the scapula and head
of the humerus; multiaxial ball-and-socket joint that
allows for flexion/extension, abduction/adduction,
circumduction, and medial/lateral rotation of the
humerus
glenohumeral ligament
one of the three intrinsic
ligaments of the shoulder joint that strengthen the
anterior articular capsule
glenoid labrum
lip of fibrocartilage located around
the outside margin of the glenoid cavity of the
scapula
gomphosis
type of fibrous joint in which the root of a
tooth is anchored into its bony jaw socket by strong
periodontal ligaments
hinge joint
synovial joint at which the convex surface
of one bone articulates with the concave surface of
a second bone; includes the elbow, knee, ankle, and
interphalangeal joints; functionally classified as a
uniaxial joint
humeroradial joint
articulation between the
capitulum of the humerus and head of the radius
humeroulnar joint
articulation between the trochlea
of humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna;
uniaxial hinge joint that allows for flexion/extension
of the forearm
hyperextension
excessive extension of joint, beyond
the normal range of movement
hyperflexion
excessive flexion of joint, beyond the
normal range of movement
iliofemoral ligament
intrinsic ligament spanning from
the ilium of the hip bone to the femur, on the
superior-anterior aspect of the hip joint
inferior rotation
movement of the scapula during
upper limb adduction in which the glenoid cavity of
the scapula moves in a downward direction as the
medial end of the scapular spine moves in an
upward direction
interosseous membrane
wide sheet of fibrous
connective tissue that fills the gap between two
parallel bones, forming a syndesmosis; found
between the radius and ulna of the forearm and
between the tibia and fibula of the leg
intracapsular ligament
ligament that is located
within the articular capsule of a synovial joint
intrinsic ligament
ligament that is fused to or
incorporated into the wall of the articular capsule of
a synovial joint
inversion
foot movement involving the intertarsal
joints of the foot in which the bottom of the foot is
turned toward the midline
ischiofemoral ligament
intrinsic ligament spanning
from the ischium of the hip bone to the femur, on
the posterior aspect of the hip joint
joint
site at which two or more bones or bone and
cartilage come together (articulate)
joint cavity
space enclosed by the articular capsule
of a synovial joint that is filled with synovial fluid and
contains the articulating surfaces of the adjacent
bones
joint interzone
site within a growing embryonic limb
bud that will become a synovial joint
lateral (external) rotation
movement of the arm at
the shoulder joint or the thigh at the hip joint that
moves the anterior surface of the limb away from
the midline of the body
lateral excursion
side-to-side movement of the
mandible away from the midline, toward either the
right or left side
lateral flexion
bending of the neck or body toward
the right or left side
lateral meniscus
C-shaped fibrocartilage articular
disc located at the knee, between the lateral
condyle of the femur and the lateral condyle of the
tibia
lateral tibiofemoral joint
portion of the knee
consisting of the articulation between the lateral
condyle of the tibia and the lateral condyle of the
femur; allows for flexion/extension at the knee
ligament
strong band of dense connective tissue
spanning between bones
ligament of the head of the femur
intracapsular
ligament that runs from the acetabulum of the hip
bone to the head of the femur
medial (internal) rotation
movement of the arm at
the shoulder joint or the thigh at the hip joint that
brings the anterior surface of the limb toward the
midline of the body
medial excursion
side-to-side movement that
returns the mandible to the midline
medial meniscus
C-shaped fibrocartilage articular
disc located at the knee, between the medial
condyle of the femur and medial condyle of the tibia
medial tibiofemoral joint
portion of the knee
consisting of the articulation between the medial
condyle of the tibia and the medial condyle of the
femur; allows for flexion/extension at the knee
9 • Key Terms
347
meniscus
articular disc
multiaxial joint
type of diarthrosis; a joint that allows
for movements within three planes (three axes)
opposition
thumb movement that brings the tip of
the thumb in contact with the tip of a finger
patellar ligament
ligament spanning from the patella
to the anterior tibia; serves as the final attachment
for the quadriceps femoris muscle
periodontal ligament
band of dense connective
tissue that anchors the root of a tooth into the bony
jaw socket
pivot joint
synovial joint at which the rounded portion
of a bone rotates within a ring formed by a ligament
and an articulating bone; functionally classified as
uniaxial joint
plane joint
synovial joint formed between the
flattened articulating surfaces of adjacent bones;
functionally classified as a multiaxial joint
plantar flexion
foot movement at the ankle in which
the heel is lifted off of the ground
posterior cruciate ligament
intracapsular ligament of
the knee; extends from the posterior, superior
surface of the tibia to the inner aspect of the medial
condyle of the femur; prevents anterior
displacement of the femur when the knee is flexed
and weight bearing
posterior talofibular ligament
intrinsic ligament
located on the lateral side of the ankle joint,
between the talus bone and lateral malleolus of the
fibula; supports the talus at the talocrural joint and
resists excess inversion of the foot
pronated position
forearm position in which the palm
faces backward
pronation
forearm motion that moves the palm of the
hand from the palm forward to the palm backward
position
protraction
anterior motion of the scapula or
mandible
proximal radioulnar joint
articulation between head
of radius and radial notch of ulna; uniaxial pivot joint
that allows for rotation of radius during pronation/
supination of forearm
pubofemoral ligament
intrinsic ligament spanning
from the pubis of the hip bone to the femur, on the
anterior-inferior aspect of the hip joint
radial collateral ligament
intrinsic ligament on the
lateral side of the elbow joint; runs from the lateral
epicondyle of humerus to merge with the annular
ligament
reposition
movement of the thumb from opposition
back to the anatomical position (next to index
finger)
retraction
posterior motion of the scapula or
mandible
rotation
movement of a bone around a central axis
(atlantoaxial joint) or around its long axis (proximal
radioulnar joint; shoulder or hip joint); twisting of
the vertebral column resulting from the summation
of small motions between adjacent vertebrae
rotator cuff
strong connective tissue structure
formed by the fusion of four rotator cuff muscle
tendons to the articular capsule of the shoulder
joint; surrounds and supports superior, anterior,
lateral, and posterior sides of the humeral head
saddle joint
synovial joint in which the articulating
ends of both bones are convex and concave in
shape, such as at the first carpometacarpal joint at
the base of the thumb; functionally classified as a
biaxial joint
subacromial bursa
bursa that protects the
supraspinatus muscle tendon and superior end of
the humerus from rubbing against the acromion of
the scapula
subcutaneous bursa
bursa that prevents friction
between skin and an underlying bone
submuscular bursa
bursa that prevents friction
between bone and a muscle or between adjacent
muscles
subscapular bursa
bursa that prevents rubbing of
the subscapularis muscle tendon against the
scapula
subtalar joint
articulation between the talus and
calcaneus bones of the foot; allows motions that
contribute to inversion/eversion of the foot
subtendinous bursa
bursa that prevents friction
between bone and a muscle tendon
superior rotation
movement of the scapula during
upper limb abduction in which the glenoid cavity of
the scapula moves in an upward direction as the
medial end of the scapular spine moves in a
downward direction
supinated position
forearm position in which the
palm faces anteriorly (anatomical position)
supination
forearm motion that moves the palm of
the hand from the palm backward to the palm
forward position
suture
fibrous joint that connects the bones of the
skull (except the mandible); an immobile joint
(synarthrosis)
symphysis
type of cartilaginous joint where the
bones are joined by fibrocartilage
synarthrosis
immobile or nearly immobile joint
synchondrosis
type of cartilaginous joint where the
bones are joined by hyaline cartilage
syndesmosis
type of fibrous joint in which two
separated, parallel bones are connected by an
348
9 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
interosseous membrane
synostosis
site at which adjacent bones or bony
components have fused together
synovial fluid
thick, lubricating fluid that fills the
interior of a synovial joint
synovial joint
joint at which the articulating surfaces
of the bones are located within a joint cavity formed
by an articular capsule
synovial membrane
thin layer that lines the inner
surface of the joint cavity at a synovial joint;
produces the synovial fluid
talocrural joint
ankle joint; articulation between the
talus bone of the foot and medial malleolus of the
tibia, distal tibia, and lateral malleolus of the fibula;
a uniaxial hinge joint that allows only for dorsiflexion
and plantar flexion of the foot
temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
articulation
between the condyle of the mandible and the
mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the
temporal bone of the skull; allows for depression/
elevation (opening/closing of mouth), protraction/
retraction, and side-to-side motions of the mandible
tendon
dense connective tissue structure that
anchors a muscle to bone
tendon sheath
connective tissue that surrounds a
tendon at places where the tendon crosses a joint;
contains a lubricating fluid to prevent friction and
allow smooth movements of the tendon
tibial collateral ligament
extrinsic ligament of knee
joint that spans from the medial epicondyle of the
femur to the medial tibia; resists hyperextension
and rotation of extended knee
ulnar collateral ligament
intrinsic ligament on the
medial side of the elbow joint; spans from the
medial epicondyle of the humerus to the medial
ulna
uniaxial joint
type of diarthrosis; joint that allows for
motion within only one plane (one axis)
zygapophysial joints
facet joints; plane joints
between the superior and inferior articular
processes of adjacent vertebrae that provide for
only limited motions between the vertebrae
Chapter Review
9.1 Classification of Joints
Structural classifications of the body joints are based
on how the bones are held together and articulate with
each other. At fibrous joints, the adjacent bones are
directly united to each other by fibrous connective
tissue. Similarly, at a cartilaginous joint, the adjacent
bones are united by cartilage. In contrast, at a synovial
joint, the articulating bone surfaces are not directly
united to each other, but come together within a fluid-
filled joint cavity.
The functional classification of body joints is based on
the degree of movement found at each joint. A
synarthrosis is a joint that is essentially immobile. This
type of joint provides for a strong connection between
the adjacent bones, which serves to protect internal
structures such as the brain or heart. Examples include
the fibrous joints of the skull sutures and the
cartilaginous manubriosternal joint. A joint that allows
for limited movement is an amphiarthrosis. An example
is the pubic symphysis of the pelvis, the cartilaginous
joint that strongly unites the right and left hip bones of
the pelvis. The cartilaginous joints in which vertebrae
are united by intervertebral discs provide for small
movements between the adjacent vertebrae and are
also an amphiarthrosis type of joint. Thus, based on
their movement ability, both fibrous and cartilaginous
joints are functionally classified as a synarthrosis or
amphiarthrosis.
The most common type of joint is the diarthrosis, which
is a freely moveable joint. All synovial joints are
functionally classified as diarthroses. A uniaxial
diarthrosis, such as the elbow, is a joint that only
allows for movement within a single anatomical plane.
Joints that allow for movements in two planes are
biaxial joints, such as the metacarpophalangeal joints
of the fingers. A multiaxial joint, such as the shoulder
or hip joint, allows for three planes of motions.
9.2 Fibrous Joints
Fibrous joints are where adjacent bones are strongly
united by fibrous connective tissue. The gap filled by
connective tissue may be narrow or wide. The three
types of fibrous joints are sutures, gomphoses, and
syndesmoses. A suture is the narrow fibrous joint that
unites most bones of the skull. At a gomphosis, the
root of a tooth is anchored across a narrow gap by
periodontal ligaments to the walls of its socket in the
bony jaw. A syndesmosis is the type of fibrous joint
found between parallel bones. The gap between the
bones may be wide and filled with a fibrous
interosseous membrane, or it may narrow with
ligaments spanning between the bones. Syndesmoses
are found between the bones of the forearm (radius
and ulna) and the leg (tibia and fibula). Fibrous joints
strongly unite adjacent bones and thus serve to provide
protection for internal organs, strength to body regions,
or weight-bearing stability.
9 • Chapter Review
349
9.3 Cartilaginous Joints
There are two types of cartilaginous joints. A
synchondrosis is formed when the adjacent bones are
united by hyaline cartilage. A temporary synchondrosis
is formed by the epiphyseal plate of a growing long
bone, which is lost when the epiphyseal plate ossifies
as the bone reaches maturity. The synchondrosis is
thus replaced by a synostosis. Permanent
synchondroses that do not ossify are found at the first
sternocostal joint and between the anterior ends of the
bony ribs and the junction with their costal cartilage. A
symphysis is where the bones are joined by
fibrocartilage and the gap between the bones may be
narrow or wide. A narrow symphysis is found at the
manubriosternal joint and at the pubic symphysis. A
wide symphysis is the intervertebral symphysis in
which the bodies of adjacent vertebrae are united by
an intervertebral disc.
9.4 Synovial Joints
Synovial joints are the most common type of joints in
the body. They are characterized by the presence of a
joint cavity, inside of which the bones of the joint
articulate with each other. The articulating surfaces of
the bones at a synovial joint are not directly connected
to each other by connective tissue or cartilage, which
allows the bones to move freely against each other. The
walls of the joint cavity are formed by the articular
capsule. Friction between the bones is reduced by a
thin layer of articular cartilage covering the surfaces of
the bones, and by a lubricating synovial fluid, which is
secreted by the synovial membrane.
Synovial joints are strengthened by the presence of
ligaments, which hold the bones together and resist
excessive or abnormal movements of the joint.
Ligaments are classified as extrinsic ligaments if they
are located outside of the articular capsule, intrinsic
ligaments if they are fused to the wall of the articular
capsule, or intracapsular ligaments if they are located
inside the articular capsule. Some synovial joints also
have an articular disc (meniscus), which can provide
padding between the bones, smooth their movements,
or strongly join the bones together to strengthen the
joint. Muscles and their tendons acting across a joint
can also increase their contractile strength when
needed, thus providing indirect support for the joint.
Bursae contain a lubricating fluid that serves to reduce
friction between structures. Subcutaneous bursae
prevent friction between the skin and an underlying
bone, submuscular bursae protect muscles from
rubbing against a bone or another muscle, and a
subtendinous bursa prevents friction between bone
and a muscle tendon. Tendon sheaths contain a
lubricating fluid and surround tendons to allow for
smooth movement of the tendon as it crosses a joint.
Based on the shape of the articulating bone surfaces
and the types of movement allowed, synovial joints are
classified into six types. At a pivot joint, one bone is
held within a ring by a ligament and its articulation with
a second bone. Pivot joints only allow for rotation
around a single axis. These are found at the articulation
between the C1 (atlas) and the dens of the C2 (axis)
vertebrae, which provides the side-to-side rotation of
the head, or at the proximal radioulnar joint between
the head of the radius and the radial notch of the ulna,
which allows for rotation of the radius during forearm
movements. Hinge joints, such as at the elbow, knee,
ankle, or interphalangeal joints between phalanx bones
of the fingers and toes, allow only for bending and
straightening of the joint. Pivot and hinge joints are
functionally classified as uniaxial joints.
Condyloid joints are found where the shallow
depression of one bone receives a rounded bony area
formed by one or two bones. Condyloid joints are found
at the base of the fingers (metacarpophalangeal joints)
and at the wrist (radiocarpal joint). At a saddle joint,
the articulating bones fit together like a rider and a
saddle. An example is the first carpometacarpal joint
located at the base of the thumb. Both condyloid and
saddle joints are functionally classified as biaxial joints.
Plane joints are formed between the small, flattened
surfaces of adjacent bones. These joints allow the
bones to slide or rotate against each other, but the
range of motion is usually slight and tightly limited by
ligaments or surrounding bones. This type of joint is
found between the articular processes of adjacent
vertebrae, at the acromioclavicular joint, or at the
intercarpal joints of the hand and intertarsal joints of
the foot. Ball-and-socket joints, in which the rounded
head of a bone fits into a large depression or socket,
are found at the shoulder and hip joints. Both plane
and ball-and-sockets joints are classified functionally
as multiaxial joints. However, ball-and-socket joints
allow for large movements, while the motions between
bones at a plane joint are small.
9.5 Types of Body Movements
The variety of movements provided by the different
types of synovial joints allows for a large range of body
motions and gives you tremendous mobility. These
movements allow you to flex or extend your body or
limbs, medially rotate and adduct your arms and flex
your elbows to hold a heavy object against your chest,
raise your arms above your head, rotate or shake your
350
9 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
head, and bend to touch the toes (with or without
bending your knees).
Each of the different structural types of synovial joints
also allow for specific motions. The atlantoaxial pivot
joint provides side-to-side rotation of the head, while
the proximal radioulnar articulation allows for rotation
of the radius during pronation and supination of the
forearm. Hinge joints, such as at the knee and elbow,
allow only for flexion and extension. Similarly, the hinge
joint of the ankle only allows for dorsiflexion and
plantar flexion of the foot.
Condyloid and saddle joints are biaxial. These allow for
flexion and extension, and abduction and adduction.
The sequential combination of flexion, adduction,
extension, and abduction produces circumduction.
Multiaxial plane joints provide for only small motions,
but these can add together over several adjacent joints
to produce body movement, such as inversion and
eversion of the foot. Similarly, plane joints allow for
flexion, extension, and lateral flexion movements of the
vertebral column. The multiaxial ball and socket joints
allow for flexion-extension, abduction-adduction, and
circumduction. In addition, these also allow for medial
(internal) and lateral (external) rotation. Ball-and-
socket joints have the greatest range of motion of all
synovial joints.
9.6 Anatomy of Selected Synovial Joints
Although synovial joints share many common features,
each joint of the body is specialized for certain
movements and activities. The joints of the upper limb
provide for large ranges of motion, which give the
upper limb great mobility, thus enabling actions such
as the throwing of a ball or typing on a keyboard. The
joints of the lower limb are more robust, giving them
greater strength and the stability needed to support
the body weight during running, jumping, or kicking
activities.
The joints of the vertebral column include the
symphysis joints formed by each intervertebral disc
and the plane synovial joints between the superior and
inferior articular processes of adjacent vertebrae. Each
of these joints provide for limited motions, but these
sum together to produce flexion, extension, lateral
flexion, and rotation of the neck and body. The range of
motions available in each region of the vertebral
column varies, with all of these motions available in the
cervical region. Only rotation is allowed in the thoracic
region, while the lumbar region has considerable
extension, flexion, and lateral flexion, but rotation is
prevented. The atlanto-occipital joint allows for flexion
and extension of the head, while the atlantoaxial joint
is a pivot joint that provides for rotation of the head.
The temporomandibular joint is the articulation
between the condyle of the mandible and the
mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the skull
temporal bone. An articular disc is located between the
bony components of this joint. A combination of gliding
and hinge motions of the mandibular condyle allows
for elevation/depression, protraction/retraction, and
side-to-side motions of the lower jaw.
The glenohumeral (shoulder) joint is a multiaxial ball-
and-socket joint that provides flexion/extension,
abduction/adduction, circumduction, and medial/
lateral rotation of the humerus. The head of the
humerus articulates with the glenoid cavity of the
scapula. The glenoid labrum extends around the
margin of the glenoid cavity. Intrinsic ligaments,
including the coracohumeral ligament and
glenohumeral ligaments, provide some support for the
shoulder joint. However, the primary support comes
from muscles crossing the joint whose tendons form
the rotator cuff. These muscle tendons are protected
from friction against the scapula by the subacromial
bursa and subscapular bursa.
The elbow is a uniaxial hinge joint that allows for
flexion/extension of the forearm. It includes the
humeroulnar joint and the humeroradial joint. The
medial elbow is supported by the ulnar collateral
ligament and the radial collateral ligament supports
the lateral side. These ligaments prevent side-to-side
movements and resist hyperextension of the elbow.
The proximal radioulnar joint is a pivot joint that allows
for rotation of the radius during pronation/supination of
the forearm. The annular ligament surrounds the head
of the radius to hold it in place at this joint.
The hip joint is a ball-and-socket joint whose motions
are more restricted than at the shoulder to provide
greater stability during weight bearing. The hip joint is
the articulation between the head of the femur and the
acetabulum of the hip bone. The acetabulum is
deepened by the acetabular labrum. The iliofemoral,
pubofemoral, and ischiofemoral ligaments strongly
support the hip joint in the upright, standing position.
The ligament of the head of the femur provides little
support but carries an important artery that supplies
the femur.
The knee includes three articulations. The
femoropatellar joint is between the patella and distal
femur. The patella, a sesamoid bone incorporated into
the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle of the
anterior thigh, serves to protect this tendon from
rubbing against the distal femur during knee
9 • Chapter Review
351
movements. The medial and lateral tibiofemoral joints,
between the condyles of the femur and condyles of the
tibia, are modified hinge joints that allow for knee
extension and flexion. During these movements, the
condyles of the femur both roll and glide over the
surface of the tibia. As the knee comes into full
extension, a slight medial rotation of the femur serves
to “lock” the knee into its most stable, weight-bearing
position. The reverse motion, a small lateral rotation of
the femur, is required to initiate knee flexion. When the
knee is flexed, some rotation of the leg is available.
Two extrinsic ligaments, the tibial collateral ligament
on the medial side and the fibular collateral ligament
on the lateral side, serve to resist hyperextension or
rotation of the extended knee joint. Two intracapsular
ligaments, the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior
cruciate ligament, span between the tibia and the inner
aspects of the femoral condyles. The anterior cruciate
ligament resists hyperextension of the knee, while the
posterior cruciate ligament prevents anterior sliding of
the femur, thus supporting the knee when it is flexed
and weight bearing. The medial and lateral menisci,
located between the femoral and tibial condyles, are
articular discs that provide padding and improve the fit
between the bones.
The talocrural joint forms the ankle. It consists of the
articulation between the talus bone and the medial
malleolus of the tibia, the distal end of the tibia, and
the lateral malleolus of the fibula. This is a uniaxial
hinge joint that allows only dorsiflexion and plantar
flexion of the foot. Gliding motions at the subtalar and
intertarsal joints of the foot allow for inversion/eversion
of the foot. The ankle joint is supported on the medial
side by the deltoid ligament, which prevents side-to-
side motions of the talus at the talocrural joint and
resists excessive eversion of the foot. The lateral ankle
is supported by the anterior and posterior talofibular
ligaments and the calcaneofibular ligament. These
support the ankle joint and also resist excess inversion
of the foot. An inversion ankle sprain, a common injury,
will result in injury to one or more of these lateral ankle
ligaments.
9.7 Development of Joints
During embryonic growth, bones and joints develop
from mesenchyme, an embryonic tissue that gives rise
to bone, cartilage, and fibrous connective tissues. In
the skull, the bones develop either directly from
mesenchyme through the process of intramembranous
ossification, or indirectly through endochondral
ossification, which initially forms a hyaline cartilage
model of the future bone, which is later converted into
bone. In both cases, the mesenchyme between the
developing bones differentiates into fibrous connective
tissue that will unite the skull bones at suture joints. In
the limbs, mesenchyme accumulations within the
growing limb bud will become a hyaline cartilage model
for each of the limb bones. A joint interzone will
develop between these areas of cartilage.
Mesenchyme cells at the margins of the interzone will
give rise to the articular capsule, while cell death at the
center forms the space that will become the joint cavity
of the future synovial joint. The hyaline cartilage model
of each limb bone will eventually be converted into
bone via the process of endochondral ossification.
However, hyaline cartilage will remain, covering the
ends of the adult bone as the articular cartilage.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Go to this website (http://openstax.org/l/childhand)
to view a radiograph (X-ray image) of a child’s hand
and wrist. The growing bones of child have an
epiphyseal plate that forms a synchondrosis
between the shaft and end of a long bone. Being
less dense than bone, the area of epiphyseal
cartilage is seen on this radiograph as the dark
epiphyseal gaps located near the ends of the long
bones, including the radius, ulna, metacarpal, and
phalanx bones. Which of the bones in this image do
not show an epiphyseal plate (epiphyseal gap)?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/synjoints) to
see an animation of synovial joints in action.
Synovial joints are places where bones articulate
with each other inside of a joint cavity. The different
types of synovial joints are the ball-and-socket joint
(shoulder joint), hinge joint (knee), pivot joint
(atlantoaxial joint, between C1 and C2 vertebrae of
the neck), condyloid joint (radiocarpal joint of the
wrist), saddle joint (first carpometacarpal joint,
between the trapezium carpal bone and the first
metacarpal bone, at the base of the thumb), and
plane joint (facet joints of vertebral column,
between superior and inferior articular processes).
Which type of synovial joint allows for the widest
ranges of motion?
352
9 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
3. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/gout) to
read about a patient who arrives at the hospital
with joint pain and weakness in his legs. What
caused this patient’s weakness?
4. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
hipreplace) to observe hip replacement surgery
(total hip arthroplasty), which can be used to
alleviate the pain and loss of joint mobility
associated with osteoarthritis of the hip joint. What
is the most common cause of hip disability?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
rheuarthritis) to learn about the symptoms and
treatments for rheumatoid arthritis. Which system
of the body malfunctions in rheumatoid arthritis
and what does this cause?
6. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/anatomical)
to learn about anatomical motions. What motions
involve increasing or decreasing the angle of the
foot at the ankle?
7. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/TMJ) to
learn about TMJ. Opening of the mouth requires the
combination of two motions at the
temporomandibular joint, an anterior gliding motion
of the articular disc and mandible and the
downward hinging of the mandible. What is the
initial movement of the mandible during opening
and how much mouth opening does this produce?
8. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
shoulderjoint1) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the
shoulder joint. What movements are available at
the shoulder joint?
9. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
shoulderjoint2) to learn about the anatomy of the
shoulder joint, including bones, joints, muscles,
nerves, and blood vessels. What is the shape of the
glenoid labrum in cross-section, and what is the
importance of this shape?
10. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
elbowjoint1) to learn more about the anatomy of
the elbow joint. What structures provide the main
stability for the elbow?
11. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
elbowjoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of
the elbow joint, including bones, joints, muscles,
nerves, and blood vessels. What are the functions
of the articular cartilage?
12. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/hipjoint1)
for a tutorial on the anatomy of the hip joint. What
is a possible consequence following a fracture of
the femoral neck within the capsule of the hip
joint?
13. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/hipjoint2)
to learn more about the anatomy of the hip joint,
including bones, joints, muscles, nerves, and
blood vessels. Where is the articular cartilage
thickest within the hip joint?
14. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/flexext) to
learn more about the flexion and extension of the
knee, as the femur both rolls and glides on the
tibia to maintain stable contact between the
bones in all knee positions. The patella glides
along a groove on the anterior side of the distal
femur. The collateral ligaments on the sides of the
knee become tight in the fully extended position
to help stabilize the knee. The posterior cruciate
ligament supports the knee when flexed and the
anterior cruciate ligament becomes tight when the
knee comes into full extension to resist
hyperextension. What are the ligaments that
support the knee joint?
15. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
kneejoint1) to learn more about the anatomy of
the knee joint, including bones, joints, muscles,
nerves, and blood vessels. Which ligament of the
knee keeps the tibia from sliding too far forward in
relation to the femur and which ligament keeps
the tibia from sliding too far backward?
16. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/kneeinjury)
to learn more about different knee injuries and
diagnostic testing of the knee. What are the most
causes of anterior cruciate ligament injury?
17. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
anklejoint1) for a tutorial on the anatomy of the
ankle joint. What are the three ligaments found on
the lateral side of the ankle joint?
18. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
anklejoint2) to learn more about the anatomy of
the ankle joint, including bones, joints, muscles,
nerves, and blood vessels. The ankle joint
resembles what type of joint used in
woodworking?
19. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
anklejoint3) to learn about the ligaments of the
ankle joint, ankle sprains, and treatment. During
an inversion ankle sprain injury, all three ligaments
that resist excessive inversion of the foot may be
injured. What is the sequence in which these three
ligaments are injured?
9 • Interactive Link Questions
353
Review Questions
20. The joint between adjacent vertebrae that
includes an invertebral disc is classified as which
type of joint?
a.
diarthrosis
b.
multiaxial
c.
amphiarthrosis
d.
synarthrosis
21. Which of these joints is classified as a
synarthrosis?
a.
the pubic symphysis
b.
the manubriosternal joint
c.
an invertebral disc
d.
the shoulder joint
22. Which of these joints is classified as a biaxial
diarthrosis?
a.
the metacarpophalangeal joint
b.
the hip joint
c.
the elbow joint
d.
the pubic symphysis
23. Synovial joints ________.
a.
may be functionally classified as a
synarthrosis
b.
are joints where the bones are connected to
each other by hyaline cartilage
c.
may be functionally classified as an
amphiarthrosis
d.
are joints where the bones articulate with
each other within a fluid-filled joint cavity
24. Which type of fibrous joint connects the tibia and
fibula?
a.
syndesmosis
b.
symphysis
c.
suture
d.
gomphosis
25. An example of a wide fibrous joint is ________.
a.
the interosseous membrane of the forearm
b.
a gomphosis
c.
a suture joint
d.
a synostosis
26. A gomphosis ________.
a.
is formed by an interosseous membrane
b.
connects the tibia and fibula bones of the leg
c.
contains a joint cavity
d.
anchors a tooth to the jaw
27. A syndesmosis is ________.
a.
a narrow fibrous joint
b.
the type of joint that unites bones of the skull
c.
a fibrous joint that unites parallel bones
d.
the type of joint that anchors the teeth in the
jaws
28. A cartilaginous joint ________.
a.
has a joint cavity
b.
is called a symphysis when the bones are
united by fibrocartilage
c.
anchors the teeth to the jaws
d.
is formed by a wide sheet of fibrous
connective tissue
29. A synchondrosis is ________.
a.
found at the pubic symphysis
b.
where bones are connected together with
fibrocartilage
c.
a type of fibrous joint
d.
found at the first sternocostal joint of the
thoracic cage
30. Which of the following are joined by a symphysis?
a.
adjacent vertebrae
b.
the first rib and the sternum
c.
the end and shaft of a long bone
d.
the radius and ulna bones
31. The epiphyseal plate of a growing long bone in a
child is classified as a ________.
a.
synchondrosis
b.
synostosis
c.
symphysis
d.
syndesmosis
32. Which type of joint provides the greatest range of
motion?
a.
ball-and-socket
b.
hinge
c.
condyloid
d.
plane
33. Which type of joint allows for only uniaxial
movement?
a.
saddle joint
b.
hinge joint
c.
condyloid joint
d.
ball-and-socket joint
34. Which of the following is a type of synovial joint?
a.
a synostosis
b.
a suture
c.
a plane joint
d.
a synchondrosis
354
9 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
35. A bursa ________.
a.
surrounds a tendon at the point where the
tendon crosses a joint
b.
secretes the lubricating fluid for a synovial
joint
c.
prevents friction between skin and bone, or a
muscle tendon and bone
d.
is the strong band of connective tissue that
holds bones together at a synovial joint
36. At synovial joints, ________.
a.
the articulating ends of the bones are directly
connected by fibrous connective tissue
b.
the ends of the bones are enclosed within a
space called a subcutaneous bursa
c.
intrinsic ligaments are located entirely inside
of the articular capsule
d.
the joint cavity is filled with a thick, lubricating
fluid
37. At a synovial joint, the synovial membrane
________.
a.
forms the fibrous connective walls of the joint
cavity
b.
is the layer of cartilage that covers the
articulating surfaces of the bones
c.
forms the intracapsular ligaments
d.
secretes the lubricating synovial fluid
38. Condyloid joints ________.
a.
are a type of ball-and-socket joint
b.
include the radiocarpal joint
c.
are a uniaxial diarthrosis joint
d.
are found at the proximal radioulnar joint
39. A meniscus is ________.
a.
a fibrocartilage pad that provides padding
between bones
b.
a fluid-filled space that prevents friction
between a muscle tendon and underlying
bone
c.
the articular cartilage that covers the ends of
a bone at a synovial joint
d.
the lubricating fluid within a synovial joint
40. The joints between the articular processes of
adjacent vertebrae can contribute to which
movement?
a.
lateral flexion
b.
circumduction
c.
dorsiflexion
d.
abduction
41. Which motion moves the bottom of the foot away
from the midline of the body?
a.
elevation
b.
dorsiflexion
c.
eversion
d.
plantar flexion
42. Movement of a body region in a circular movement
at a condyloid joint is what type of motion?
a.
rotation
b.
elevation
c.
abduction
d.
circumduction
43. Supination is the motion that moves the
________.
a.
hand from the palm backward position to the
palm forward position
b.
foot so that the bottom of the foot faces the
midline of the body
c.
hand from the palm forward position to the
palm backward position
d.
scapula in an upward direction
44. Movement at the shoulder joint that moves the
upper limb laterally away from the body is called
________.
a.
elevation
b.
eversion
c.
abduction
d.
lateral rotation
45. The primary support for the glenohumeral joint is
provided by the ________.
a.
coracohumeral ligament
b.
glenoid labrum
c.
rotator cuff muscles
d.
subacromial bursa
46. The proximal radioulnar joint ________.
a.
is supported by the annular ligament
b.
contains an articular disc that strongly unites
the bones
c.
is supported by the ulnar collateral ligament
d.
is a hinge joint that allows for flexion/
extension of the forearm
9 • Review Questions
355
47. Which statement is true concerning the knee
joint?
a.
The lateral meniscus is an intrinsic ligament
located on the lateral side of the knee joint.
b.
Hyperextension is resisted by the posterior
cruciate ligament.
c.
The anterior cruciate ligament supports the
knee when it is flexed and weight bearing.
d.
The medial meniscus is attached to the tibial
collateral ligament.
48. The ankle joint ________.
a.
is also called the subtalar joint
b.
allows for gliding movements that produce
inversion/eversion of the foot
c.
is a uniaxial hinge joint
d.
is supported by the tibial collateral ligament
on the lateral side
49. Which region of the vertebral column has the
greatest range of motion for rotation?
a.
cervical
b.
thoracic
c.
lumbar
d.
sacral
50. Intramembranous ossification ________.
a.
gives rise to the bones of the limbs
b.
produces the bones of the top and sides of
the skull
c.
produces the bones of the face and base of
the skull
d.
involves the conversion of a hyaline cartilage
model into bone
51. Synovial joints ________.
a.
are derived from fontanelles
b.
are produced by intramembranous
ossification
c.
develop at an interzone site
d.
are produced by endochondral ossification
52. Endochondral ossification is ________.
a.
the process that replaces hyaline cartilage
with bone tissue
b.
the process by which mesenchyme
differentiates directly into bone tissue
c.
completed before birth
d.
the process that gives rise to the joint
interzone and future joint cavity
Critical Thinking Questions
53. Define how joints are classified based on function.
Describe and give an example for each functional
type of joint.
54. Explain the reasons for why joints differ in their
degree of mobility.
55. Distinguish between a narrow and wide fibrous
joint and give an example of each.
56. The periodontal ligaments are made of collagen
fibers and are responsible for connecting the roots
of the teeth to the jaws. Describe how scurvy, a
disease that inhibits collagen production, can
affect the teeth.
57. Describe the two types of cartilaginous joints and
give examples of each.
58. Both functional and structural classifications can
be used to describe an individual joint. Define the
first sternocostal joint and the pubic symphysis
using both functional and structural
characteristics.
59. Describe the characteristic structures found at all
synovial joints.
60. Describe the structures that provide direct and
indirect support for a synovial joint.
61. Briefly define the types of joint movements
available at a ball-and-socket joint.
62. Discuss the joints involved and movements
required for you to cross your arms together in
front of your chest.
63. Discuss the structures that contribute to support
of the shoulder joint.
64. Describe the sequence of injuries that may occur if
the extended, weight-bearing knee receives a very
strong blow to the lateral side of the knee.
65. Describe how synovial joints develop within the
embryonic limb.
66. Differentiate between endochondral and
intramembranous ossification.
356
9 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 10
Muscle Tissue
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Explain the organization of muscle tissue
•
Describe the function and structure of skeletal, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle
•
Explain how muscles work with tendons to move the body
•
Describe how muscles contract and relax
•
Define the process of muscle metabolism
•
Explain how the nervous system controls muscle tension
•
Relate the connections between exercise and muscle performance
•
Explain the development and regeneration of muscle tissue
When most people think of muscles, they think of the muscles that are visible just under the skin,
particularly of the limbs. These are skeletal muscles, so-named because most of them move the skeleton. But there
are two other types of muscle in the body, with distinctly different jobs. Cardiac muscle, found in the heart, is
concerned with pumping blood through the circulatory system. Smooth muscle is concerned with various
involuntary movements, such as having one’s hair stand on end when cold or frightened, or moving food through the
digestive system. This chapter will examine the structure and function of these three types of muscles.
10.1 Overview of Muscle Tissues
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the different types of muscle
•
Explain contractibility and extensibility
Muscle is one of the four primary tissue types of the body, and the body contains three types of muscle tissue:
skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle (Figure 10.2). All three muscle tissues have some properties in
common; they all exhibit a quality called excitability as their plasma membranes can change their electrical states
Figure 10.1
Tennis Player Athletes rely on toned skeletal muscles to supply the force required for movement. (credit: Emmanuel
Huybrechts/flickr)
(from polarized to depolarized) and send an electrical wave called an action potential along the entire length of the
membrane. While the nervous system can influence the excitability of cardiac and smooth muscle to some degree,
skeletal muscle completely depends on signaling from the nervous system to work properly. On the other hand, both
cardiac muscle and smooth muscle can respond to other stimuli, such as hormones and local stimuli.
FIGURE 10.2
The Three Types of Muscle Tissue
The body contains three types of muscle tissue: (a) skeletal muscle, (b) smooth
muscle, and (c) cardiac muscle. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The muscles all begin the actual process of contracting (shortening) when a protein called actin is pulled by a
protein called myosin. This occurs in striated muscle (skeletal and cardiac) after specific binding sites on the actin
have been exposed in response to the interaction between calcium ions (Ca++) and proteins (troponin and
tropomyosin) that “shield” the actin-binding sites. Ca++ also is required for the contraction of smooth muscle,
although its role is different: here Ca++ activates enzymes, which in turn activate myosin heads. All muscles require
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to continue the process of contracting, and they all relax when the Ca++ is removed
and the actin-binding sites are re-shielded.
A muscle can return to its original length when relaxed due to a quality of muscle tissue called elasticity. It can
recoil back to its original length due to elastic fibers. Muscle tissue also has the quality of extensibility; it can
stretch or extend. Contractility allows muscle tissue to pull on its attachment points and shorten with force.
Differences among the three muscle types include the microscopic organization of their contractile proteins—actin
and myosin. The actin and myosin proteins are arranged very regularly in the cytoplasm of individual muscle cells
(referred to as fibers) in both skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle, which creates a pattern, or stripes, called
striations. The striations are visible with a light microscope under high magnification (see Figure 10.2). Skeletal
358
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
muscle fibers are multinucleated structures that compose the skeletal muscle. Cardiac muscle fibers each have
one to two nuclei and are physically and electrically connected to each other so that the entire heart contracts as
one unit (called a syncytium).
Because the actin and myosin are not arranged in such regular fashion in smooth muscle, the cytoplasm of a
smooth muscle fiber (which has only a single nucleus) has a uniform, nonstriated appearance (resulting in the name
smooth muscle). However, the less organized appearance of smooth muscle should not be interpreted as less
efficient. Smooth muscle in the walls of arteries is a critical component that regulates blood pressure necessary to
push blood through the circulatory system; and smooth muscle in the skin, visceral organs, and internal
passageways is essential for moving all materials through the body.
10.2 Skeletal Muscle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the layers of connective tissues packaging skeletal muscle
•
Explain how muscles work with tendons to move the body
•
Identify areas of the skeletal muscle fibers
•
Describe excitation-contraction coupling
The best-known feature of skeletal muscle is its ability to contract and cause movement. Skeletal muscles act not
only to produce movement but also to stop movement, such as resisting gravity to maintain posture. Small, constant
adjustments of the skeletal muscles are needed to hold a body upright or balanced in any position. Muscles also
prevent excess movement of the bones and joints, maintaining skeletal stability and preventing skeletal structure
damage or deformation. Joints can become misaligned or dislocated entirely by pulling on the associated bones;
muscles work to keep joints stable. Skeletal muscles are located throughout the body at the openings of internal
tracts to control the movement of various substances. These muscles allow functions, such as swallowing, urination,
and defecation, to be under voluntary control. Skeletal muscles also protect internal organs (particularly abdominal
and pelvic organs) by acting as an external barrier or shield to external trauma and by supporting the weight of the
organs.
Skeletal muscles contribute to the maintenance of homeostasis in the body by generating heat. Muscle contraction
requires energy, and when ATP is broken down, heat is produced. This heat is very noticeable during exercise, when
sustained muscle movement causes body temperature to rise, and in cases of extreme cold, when shivering
produces random skeletal muscle contractions to generate heat.
Each skeletal muscle is an organ that consists of various integrated tissues. These tissues include the skeletal
muscle fibers, blood vessels, nerve fibers, and connective tissue. Each skeletal muscle has three layers of
connective tissue (called “mysia”) that enclose it and provide structure to the muscle as a whole, and also
compartmentalize the muscle fibers within the muscle (Figure 10.3). Each muscle is wrapped in a sheath of dense,
irregular connective tissue called the epimysium, which allows a muscle to contract and move powerfully while
maintaining its structural integrity. The epimysium also separates muscle from other tissues and organs in the area,
allowing the muscle to move independently.
10.2 • Skeletal Muscle
359
FIGURE 10.3
The Three Connective Tissue Layers
Bundles of muscle fibers, called fascicles, are covered by the perimysium. Muscle
fibers are covered by the endomysium.
Inside each skeletal muscle, muscle fibers are organized into individual bundles, each called a fascicle, by a middle
layer of connective tissue called the perimysium. This fascicular organization is common in muscles of the limbs; it
allows the nervous system to trigger a specific movement of a muscle by activating a subset of muscle fibers within
a bundle, or fascicle of the muscle. Inside each fascicle, each muscle fiber is encased in a thin connective tissue
layer of collagen and reticular fibers called the endomysium. The endomysium contains the extracellular fluid and
nutrients to support the muscle fiber. These nutrients are supplied via blood to the muscle tissue.
In skeletal muscles that work with tendons to pull on bones, the collagen in the three tissue layers (the mysia)
intertwines with the collagen of a tendon. At the other end of the tendon, it fuses with the periosteum coating the
bone. The tension created by contraction of the muscle fibers is then transferred though the mysia, to the tendon,
and then to the periosteum to pull on the bone for movement of the skeleton. In other places, the mysia may fuse
with a broad, tendon-like sheet called an aponeurosis, or to fascia, the connective tissue between skin and bones.
The broad sheet of connective tissue in the lower back that the latissimus dorsi muscles (the “lats”) fuse into is an
example of an aponeurosis.
Every skeletal muscle is also richly supplied by blood vessels for nourishment, oxygen delivery, and waste removal.
In addition, every muscle fiber in a skeletal muscle is supplied by the axon branch of a somatic motor neuron, which
signals the fiber to contract. Unlike cardiac and smooth muscle, the only way to functionally contract a skeletal
muscle is through signaling from the nervous system.
Skeletal Muscle Fibers
Because skeletal muscle cells are long and cylindrical, they are commonly referred to as muscle fibers. Skeletal
muscle fibers can be quite large for human cells, with diameters up to 100 μm and lengths up to 30 cm (11.8 in) in
the Sartorius of the upper leg. During early development, embryonic myoblasts, each with its own nucleus, fuse with
up to hundreds of other myoblasts to form the multinucleated skeletal muscle fibers. Multiple nuclei mean multiple
copies of genes, permitting the production of the large amounts of proteins and enzymes needed for muscle
360
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
contraction.
Some other terminology associated with muscle fibers is rooted in the Greek sarco, which means “flesh.” The
plasma membrane of muscle fibers is called the sarcolemma, the cytoplasm is referred to as sarcoplasm, and the
specialized smooth endoplasmic reticulum, which stores, releases, and retrieves calcium ions (Ca++) is called the
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) (Figure 10.4). As will soon be described, the functional unit of a skeletal muscle fiber
is the sarcomere, a highly organized arrangement of the contractile myofilaments actin (thin filament) and myosin
(thick filament), along with other support proteins.
FIGURE 10.4
Muscle Fiber
A skeletal muscle fiber is surrounded by a plasma membrane called the sarcolemma, which contains
sarcoplasm, the cytoplasm of muscle cells. A muscle fiber is composed of many fibrils, which give the cell its striated appearance.
The Sarcomere
The striated appearance of skeletal muscle fibers is due to the arrangement of the myofilaments of actin and myosin
in sequential order from one end of the muscle fiber to the other. Each packet of these microfilaments and their
regulatory proteins, troponin and tropomyosin (along with other proteins) is called a sarcomere.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/micromacro) to learn more about macro- and microstructures of skeletal
muscles. (a) What are the names of the “junction points” between sarcomeres? (b) What are the names of the
“subunits” within the myofibrils that run the length of skeletal muscle fibers? (c) What is the “double strand of
pearls” described in the video? (d) What gives a skeletal muscle fiber its striated appearance?
The sarcomere is the functional unit of the muscle fiber. The sarcomere itself is bundled within the myofibril that
runs the entire length of the muscle fiber and attaches to the sarcolemma at its end. As myofibrils contract, the
entire muscle cell contracts. Because myofibrils are only approximately 1.2 μm in diameter, hundreds to thousands
(each with thousands of sarcomeres) can be found inside one muscle fiber. Each sarcomere is approximately 2 μm
in length with a three-dimensional cylinder-like arrangement and is bordered by structures called Z-discs (also
called Z-lines, because pictures are two-dimensional), to which the actin myofilaments are anchored (Figure 10.5).
Because the actin and its troponin-tropomyosin complex (projecting from the Z-discs toward the center of the
sarcomere) form strands that are thinner than the myosin, it is called the thin filament of the sarcomere. Likewise,
because the myosin strands and their multiple heads (projecting from the center of the sarcomere, toward but not
all to way to, the Z-discs) have more mass and are thicker, they are called the thick filament of the sarcomere.
10.2 • Skeletal Muscle
361
FIGURE 10.5
The Sarcomere
The sarcomere, the region from one Z-line to the next Z-line, is the functional unit of a skeletal muscle
fiber.
The Neuromuscular Junction
Another specialization of the skeletal muscle is the site where a motor neuron’s terminal meets the muscle
fiber—called the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). This is where the muscle fiber first responds to signaling by the
motor neuron. Every skeletal muscle fiber in every skeletal muscle is innervated by a motor neuron at the NMJ.
Excitation signals from the neuron are the only way to functionally activate the fiber to contract.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Every skeletal muscle fiber is supplied by a motor neuron at the NMJ. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
skelmuscfiber) to learn more about what happens at the NMJ. (a) What is the definition of a motor unit? (b) What is
the structural and functional difference between a large motor unit and a small motor unit? (c) Can you give an
example of each? (d) Why is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine degraded after binding to its receptor?
Excitation-Contraction Coupling
All living cells have membrane potentials, or electrical gradients across their membranes. The inside of the
membrane is usually around -60 to -90 mV, relative to the outside. This is referred to as a cell’s membrane potential.
Neurons and muscle cells can use their membrane potentials to generate electrical signals. They do this by
controlling the movement of charged particles, called ions, across their membranes to create electrical currents.
This is achieved by opening and closing specialized proteins in the membrane called ion channels. Although the
currents generated by ions moving through these channel proteins are very small, they form the basis of both neural
signaling and muscle contraction.
Both neurons and skeletal muscle cells are electrically excitable, meaning that they are able to generate action
potentials. An action potential is a special type of electrical signal that can travel along a cell membrane as a wave.
This allows a signal to be transmitted quickly and faithfully over long distances.
Although the term excitation-contraction coupling confuses or scares some students, it comes down to this: for a
skeletal muscle fiber to contract, its membrane must first be “excited”—in other words, it must be stimulated to fire
an action potential. The muscle fiber action potential, which sweeps along the sarcolemma as a wave, is “coupled”
to the actual contraction through the release of calcium ions (Ca++) from the SR. Once released, the Ca++ interacts
362
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
with the shielding proteins, forcing them to move aside so that the actin-binding sites are available for attachment
by myosin heads. The myosin then pulls the actin filaments toward the center, shortening the muscle fiber.
In skeletal muscle, this sequence begins with signals from the somatic motor division of the nervous system. In
other words, the “excitation” step in skeletal muscles is always triggered by signaling from the nervous system
(Figure 10.6).
FIGURE 10.6
Motor End-Plate and Innervation
At the NMJ, the axon terminal releases ACh. The motor end-plate is the location of the
ACh-receptors in the muscle fiber sarcolemma. When ACh molecules are released, they diffuse across a minute space called the synaptic
cleft and bind to the receptors.
The motor neurons that tell the skeletal muscle fibers to contract originate in the spinal cord, with a smaller number
located in the brainstem for activation of skeletal muscles of the face, head, and neck. These neurons have long
processes, called axons, which are specialized to transmit action potentials long distances— in this case, all the way
from the spinal cord to the muscle itself (which may be up to three feet away). The axons of multiple neurons bundle
together to form nerves, like wires bundled together in a cable.
10.2 • Skeletal Muscle
363
Signaling begins when a neuronal action potential travels along the axon of a motor neuron, and then along the
individual branches to terminate at the NMJ. At the NMJ, the axon terminal releases a chemical messenger, or
neurotransmitter, called acetylcholine (ACh). The ACh molecules diffuse across a minute space called the
synaptic cleft and bind to ACh receptors located within the motor end-plate of the sarcolemma on the other side of
the synapse. Once ACh binds, a channel in the ACh receptor opens and positively charged ions can pass through into
the muscle fiber, causing it to depolarize, meaning that the membrane potential of the muscle fiber becomes less
negative (closer to zero.)
As the membrane depolarizes, another set of ion channels called voltage-gated sodium channels are triggered to
open. Sodium ions enter the muscle fiber, and an action potential rapidly spreads (or “fires”) along the entire
membrane to initiate excitation-contraction coupling.
Things happen very quickly in the world of excitable membranes (just think about how quickly you can snap your
fingers as soon as you decide to do it). Immediately following depolarization of the membrane, it repolarizes, re-
establishing the negative membrane potential. Meanwhile, the ACh in the synaptic cleft is degraded by the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) so that the ACh cannot rebind to a receptor and reopen its channel, which would cause
unwanted extended muscle excitation and contraction.
Propagation of an action potential along the sarcolemma is the excitation portion of excitation-contraction coupling.
Recall that this excitation actually triggers the release of calcium ions (Ca++) from its storage in the cell’s SR. For the
action potential to reach the membrane of the SR, there are periodic invaginations in the sarcolemma, called T-
tubules (“T” stands for “transverse”). You will recall that the diameter of a muscle fiber can be up to 100 μm, so
these T-tubules ensure that the membrane can get close to the SR in the sarcoplasm. The arrangement of a T-tubule
with the membranes of SR on either side is called a triad (Figure 10.7). The triad surrounds the cylindrical structure
called a myofibril, which contains actin and myosin.
FIGURE 10.7
The T-tubule
Narrow T-tubules permit the conduction of electrical impulses. The SR functions to regulate intracellular
levels of calcium. Two terminal cisternae (where enlarged SR connects to the T-tubule) and one T-tubule comprise a triad—a “threesome”
of membranes, with those of SR on two sides and the T-tubule sandwiched between them.
The T-tubules carry the action potential into the interior of the cell, which triggers the opening of calcium channels
in the membrane of the adjacent SR, causing Ca++ to diffuse out of the SR and into the sarcoplasm. It is the arrival of
Ca++ in the sarcoplasm that initiates contraction of the muscle fiber by its contractile units, or sarcomeres.
10.3 Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the components involved in a muscle contraction
•
Explain how muscles contract and relax
•
Describe the sliding filament model of muscle contraction
The sequence of events that result in the contraction of an individual muscle fiber begins with a signal—the
neurotransmitter, ACh—from the motor neuron innervating that fiber. The local membrane of the fiber will depolarize
364
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
as positively charged sodium ions (Na+) enter, triggering an action potential that spreads to the rest of the
membrane which will depolarize, including the T-tubules. This triggers the release of calcium ions (Ca++) from
storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The Ca++ then initiates contraction, which is sustained by ATP (Figure
10.8). As long as Ca++ ions remain in the sarcoplasm to bind to troponin, which keeps the actin-binding sites
“unshielded,” and as long as ATP is available to drive the cross-bridge cycling and the pulling of actin strands by
myosin, the muscle fiber will continue to shorten to an anatomical limit.
FIGURE 10.8
Contraction of a Muscle Fiber
A cross-bridge forms between actin and the myosin heads triggering contraction. As long
as Ca++ ions remain in the sarcoplasm to bind to troponin, and as long as ATP is available, the muscle fiber will continue to shorten.
Muscle contraction usually stops when signaling from the motor neuron ends, which repolarizes the sarcolemma
and T-tubules, and closes the voltage-gated calcium channels in the SR. Ca++ ions are then pumped back into the
SR, which causes the tropomyosin to reshield (or re-cover) the binding sites on the actin strands. A muscle also can
stop contracting when it runs out of ATP and becomes fatigued (Figure 10.9).
10.3 • Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
365
FIGURE 10.9
Relaxation of a Muscle Fiber
Ca++ ions are pumped back into the SR, which causes the tropomyosin to reshield the
binding sites on the actin strands. A muscle may also stop contracting when it runs out of ATP and becomes fatigued.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The release of calcium ions initiates muscle contractions. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/calciumrole) to
learn more about the role of calcium. (a) What are “T-tubules” and what is their role? (b) Please describe how actin-
binding sites are made available for cross-bridging with myosin heads during contraction.
The molecular events of muscle fiber shortening occur within the fiber’s sarcomeres (see Figure 10.10). The
contraction of a striated muscle fiber occurs as the sarcomeres, linearly arranged within myofibrils, shorten as
myosin heads pull on the actin filaments.
The region where thick and thin filaments overlap has a dense appearance, as there is little space between the
filaments. This zone where thin and thick filaments overlap is very important to muscle contraction, as it is the site
where filament movement starts. Thin filaments, anchored at their ends by the Z-discs, do not extend completely
into the central region that only contains thick filaments, anchored at their bases at a spot called the M-line. A
myofibril is composed of many sarcomeres running along its length; thus, myofibrils and muscle cells contract as the
sarcomeres contract.
The Sliding Filament Model of Contraction
When signaled by a motor neuron, a skeletal muscle fiber contracts as the thin filaments are pulled and then slide
past the thick filaments within the fiber’s sarcomeres. This process is known as the sliding filament model of muscle
contraction (Figure 10.10). The sliding can only occur when myosin-binding sites on the actin filaments are exposed
by a series of steps that begins with Ca++ entry into the sarcoplasm.
366
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 10.10
The Sliding Filament Model of Muscle Contraction
When a sarcomere contracts, the Z lines move closer together, and
the I band becomes smaller. The A band stays the same width. At full contraction, the thin and thick filaments overlap completely.
Tropomyosin is a protein that winds around the chains of the actin filament and covers the myosin-binding sites to
prevent actin from binding to myosin. Tropomyosin binds to troponin to form a troponin-tropomyosin complex. The
troponin-tropomyosin complex prevents the myosin “heads” from binding to the active sites on the actin
microfilaments. Troponin also has a binding site for Ca++ ions.
To initiate muscle contraction, tropomyosin has to expose the myosin-binding site on an actin filament to allow
cross-bridge formation between the actin and myosin microfilaments. The first step in the process of contraction is
for Ca++ to bind to troponin so that tropomyosin can slide away from the binding sites on the actin strands. This
allows the myosin heads to bind to these exposed binding sites and form cross-bridges. The thin filaments are then
pulled by the myosin heads to slide past the thick filaments toward the center of the sarcomere. But each head can
only pull a very short distance before it has reached its limit and must be “re-cocked” before it can pull again, a step
that requires ATP.
ATP and Muscle Contraction
For thin filaments to continue to slide past thick filaments during muscle contraction, myosin heads must pull the
actin at the binding sites, detach, re-cock, attach to more binding sites, pull, detach, re-cock, etc. This repeated
movement is known as the cross-bridge cycle. This motion of the myosin heads is similar to the oars when an
individual rows a boat: The paddle of the oars (the myosin heads) pull, are lifted from the water (detach),
repositioned (re-cocked) and then immersed again to pull (Figure 10.11). Each cycle requires energy, and the action
of the myosin heads in the sarcomeres repetitively pulling on the thin filaments also requires energy, which is
provided by ATP.
10.3 • Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
367
FIGURE 10.11
Skeletal Muscle Contraction
(a) The active site on actin is exposed as calcium binds to troponin. (b) The myosin head is
attracted to actin, and myosin binds actin at its actin-binding site, forming the cross-bridge. (c) During the power stroke, the phosphate
generated in the previous contraction cycle is released. This results in the myosin head pivoting toward the center of the sarcomere, after
which the attached ADP and phosphate group are released. (d) A new molecule of ATP attaches to the myosin head, causing the cross-
bridge to detach. (e) The myosin head hydrolyzes ATP to ADP and phosphate, which returns the myosin to the cocked position.
Cross-bridge formation occurs when the myosin head attaches to the actin while adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and
inorganic phosphate (Pi) are still bound to myosin (Figure 10.11a,b). Pi is then released, causing myosin to form a
stronger attachment to the actin, after which the myosin head moves toward the M-line, pulling the actin along with
it. As actin is pulled, the filaments move approximately 10 nm toward the M-line. This movement is called the power
stroke, as movement of the thin filament occurs at this step (Figure 10.11c). In the absence of ATP, the myosin head
will not detach from actin.
One part of the myosin head attaches to the binding site on the actin, but the head has another binding site for ATP.
368
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
ATP binding causes the myosin head to detach from the actin (Figure 10.11d). After this occurs, ATP is converted to
ADP and Pi by the intrinsic ATPase activity of myosin. The energy released during ATP hydrolysis changes the angle
of the myosin head into a cocked position (Figure 10.11e). The myosin head is now in position for further movement.
When the myosin head is cocked, myosin is in a high-energy configuration. This energy is expended as the myosin
head moves through the power stroke, and at the end of the power stroke, the myosin head is in a low-energy
position. After the power stroke, ADP is released; however, the formed cross-bridge is still in place, and actin and
myosin are bound together. As long as ATP is available, it readily attaches to myosin, the cross-bridge cycle can
recur, and muscle contraction can continue.
Note that each thick filament of roughly 300 myosin molecules has multiple myosin heads, and many cross-bridges
form and break continuously during muscle contraction. Multiply this by all of the sarcomeres in one myofibril, all
the myofibrils in one muscle fiber, and all of the muscle fibers in one skeletal muscle, and you can understand why
so much energy (ATP) is needed to keep skeletal muscles working. In fact, it is the loss of ATP that results in the
rigor mortis observed soon after someone dies. With no further ATP production possible, there is no ATP available
for myosin heads to detach from the actin-binding sites, so the cross-bridges stay in place, causing the rigidity in the
skeletal muscles.
Sources of ATP
ATP supplies the energy for muscle contraction to take place. In addition to its direct role in the cross-bridge cycle,
ATP also provides the energy for the active-transport Ca++ pumps in the SR. Muscle contraction does not occur
without sufficient amounts of ATP. The amount of ATP stored in muscle is very low, only sufficient to power a few
seconds worth of contractions. As it is broken down, ATP must therefore be regenerated and replaced quickly to
allow for sustained contraction. There are three mechanisms by which ATP can be regenerated in muscle cells:
creatine phosphate metabolism, anaerobic glycolysis, and aerobic respiration.
Creatine phosphate is a molecule that can store energy in its phosphate bonds. In a resting muscle, excess ATP
transfers its energy to creatine, producing ADP and creatine phosphate. This acts as an energy reserve that can be
used to quickly create more ATP. When the muscle starts to contract and needs energy, creatine phosphate
transfers its phosphate back to ADP to form ATP and creatine. This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme creatine
kinase and occurs very quickly; thus, creatine phosphate-derived ATP powers the first few seconds of muscle
contraction. However, creatine phosphate can only provide approximately 15 seconds worth of energy, at which
point another energy source has to be used (Figure 10.12).
10.3 • Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
369
FIGURE 10.12
Muscle Metabolism
(a) Some ATP is stored in a resting muscle. As contraction starts, it is used up in seconds. More ATP
is generated from creatine phosphate for about 15 seconds. (b) Each glucose molecule produces two ATP and two molecules of pyruvic
acid, which can be used in aerobic respiration or converted to lactic acid. If oxygen is not available, pyruvic acid is converted to lactic acid,
which may contribute to muscle fatigue. This occurs during strenuous exercise when high amounts of energy are needed but oxygen cannot
be sufficiently delivered to muscle. (c) Aerobic respiration is the breakdown of glucose in the presence of oxygen (O2) to produce carbon
dioxide, water, and ATP. Approximately 95 percent of the ATP required for resting or moderately active muscles is provided by aerobic
respiration, which takes place in mitochondria.
As the ATP produced by creatine phosphate is depleted, muscles turn to glycolysis as an ATP source. Glycolysis is
an anaerobic (non-oxygen-dependent) process that breaks down glucose (sugar) to produce ATP; however,
glycolysis cannot generate ATP as quickly as creatine phosphate. Thus, the switch to glycolysis results in a slower
rate of ATP availability to the muscle. The sugar used in glycolysis can be provided by blood glucose or by
metabolizing glycogen that is stored in the muscle. The breakdown of one glucose molecule produces two ATP and
two molecules of pyruvic acid, which can be used in aerobic respiration or when oxygen levels are low, converted to
lactic acid (Figure 10.12b).
If oxygen is available, pyruvic acid is used in aerobic respiration. However, if oxygen is not available, pyruvic acid is
converted to lactic acid, which may contribute to muscle fatigue. This conversion allows the recycling of the enzyme
NAD+ from NADH, which is needed for glycolysis to continue. This occurs during strenuous exercise when high
amounts of energy are needed but oxygen cannot be sufficiently delivered to muscle. Glycolysis itself cannot be
sustained for very long (approximately 1 minute of muscle activity), but it is useful in facilitating short bursts of high-
intensity output. This is because glycolysis does not utilize glucose very efficiently, producing a net gain of two ATPs
per molecule of glucose, and the end product of lactic acid, which may contribute to muscle fatigue as it
accumulates.
Aerobic respiration is the breakdown of glucose or other nutrients in the presence of oxygen (O2) to produce carbon
dioxide, water, and ATP. Approximately 95 percent of the ATP required for resting or moderately active muscles is
provided by aerobic respiration, which takes place in mitochondria. The inputs for aerobic respiration include
370
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
glucose circulating in the bloodstream, pyruvic acid, and fatty acids. Aerobic respiration is much more efficient than
anaerobic glycolysis, producing approximately 36 ATPs per molecule of glucose versus four from glycolysis.
However, aerobic respiration cannot be sustained without a steady supply of O2 to the skeletal muscle and is much
slower (Figure 10.12c). To compensate, muscles store small amount of excess oxygen in proteins call myoglobin,
allowing for more efficient muscle contractions and less fatigue. Aerobic training also increases the efficiency of the
circulatory system so that O2 can be supplied to the muscles for longer periods of time.
Muscle fatigue occurs when a muscle can no longer contract in response to signals from the nervous system. The
exact causes of muscle fatigue are not fully known, although certain factors have been correlated with the
decreased muscle contraction that occurs during fatigue. ATP is needed for normal muscle contraction, and as ATP
reserves are reduced, muscle function may decline. This may be more of a factor in brief, intense muscle output
rather than sustained, lower intensity efforts. Lactic acid buildup may lower intracellular pH, affecting enzyme and
protein activity. Imbalances in Na+ and K+ levels as a result of membrane depolarization may disrupt Ca++ flow out
of the SR. Long periods of sustained exercise may damage the SR and the sarcolemma, resulting in impaired Ca++
regulation.
Intense muscle activity results in an oxygen debt, which is the amount of oxygen needed to compensate for ATP
produced without oxygen during muscle contraction. Oxygen is required to restore ATP and creatine phosphate
levels, convert lactic acid to pyruvic acid, and, in the liver, to convert lactic acid into glucose or glycogen. Other
systems used during exercise also require oxygen, and all of these combined processes result in the increased
breathing rate that occurs after exercise. Until the oxygen debt has been met, oxygen intake is elevated, even after
exercise has stopped.
Relaxation of a Skeletal Muscle
Relaxing skeletal muscle fibers, and ultimately, the skeletal muscle, begins with the motor neuron, which stops
releasing its chemical signal, ACh, into the synapse at the NMJ. The muscle fiber will repolarize, which closes the
gates in the SR where Ca++ was being released. ATP-driven pumps will move Ca++ out of the sarcoplasm back into
the SR. This results in the “reshielding” of the actin-binding sites on the thin filaments. Without the ability to form
cross-bridges between the thin and thick filaments, the muscle fiber loses its tension and relaxes.
Muscle Strength
The number of skeletal muscle fibers in a given muscle is genetically determined and does not change. Muscle
strength is directly related to the amount of myofibrils and sarcomeres within each fiber. Factors, such as hormones
and stress (and artificial anabolic steroids), acting on the muscle can increase the production of sarcomeres and
myofibrils within the muscle fibers, a change called hypertrophy, which results in the increased mass and bulk in a
skeletal muscle. Likewise, decreased use of a skeletal muscle results in atrophy, where the number of sarcomeres
and myofibrils disappear (but not the number of muscle fibers). It is common for a limb in a cast to show atrophied
muscles when the cast is removed, and certain diseases, such as polio, show atrophied muscles.
Disorders of the...
Muscular System
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a progressive weakening of the skeletal muscles. It is one of several
diseases collectively referred to as “muscular dystrophy.” DMD is caused by a lack of the protein dystrophin,
which helps the thin filaments of myofibrils bind to the sarcolemma. Without sufficient dystrophin, muscle
contractions cause the sarcolemma to tear, causing an influx of Ca++, leading to cellular damage and muscle
fiber degradation. Over time, as muscle damage accumulates, muscle mass is lost, and greater functional
impairments develop.
DMD is an inherited disorder caused by an abnormal X chromosome. It primarily affects males, and it is usually
diagnosed in early childhood. DMD usually first appears as difficulty with balance and motion, and then
progresses to an inability to walk. It continues progressing upward in the body from the lower extremities to the
upper body, where it affects the muscles responsible for breathing and circulation. It ultimately causes death
due to respiratory failure, and those afflicted do not usually live past their 20s.
10.3 • Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation
371
10.4 Nervous System Control of Muscle Tension
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain concentric, isotonic, and eccentric contractions
•
Describe the length-tension relationship
•
Describe the three phases of a muscle twitch
•
Define wave summation, tetanus, and treppe
To move an object, referred to as load, the sarcomeres in the muscle fibers of the skeletal muscle must shorten. The
force generated by the contraction of the muscle (or shortening of the sarcomeres) is called muscle tension.
However, muscle tension also is generated when the muscle is contracting against a load that does not move,
resulting in two main types of skeletal muscle contractions: isotonic contractions and isometric contractions.
In isotonic contractions, where the tension in the muscle stays constant, a load is moved as the length of the
muscle changes (shortens). There are two types of isotonic contractions: concentric and eccentric. A concentric
contraction involves the muscle shortening to move a load. An example of this is the biceps brachii muscle
contracting when a hand weight is brought upward with increasing muscle tension. As the biceps brachii contract,
the angle of the elbow joint decreases as the forearm is brought toward the body. Here, the biceps brachii contracts
as sarcomeres in its muscle fibers are shortening and cross-bridges form; the myosin heads pull the actin. An
eccentric contraction occurs as the muscle tension diminishes and the muscle lengthens. In this case, the hand
weight is lowered in a slow and controlled manner as the amount of cross-bridges being activated by nervous
system stimulation decreases. In this case, as tension is released from the biceps brachii, the angle of the elbow
joint increases. Eccentric contractions are also used for movement and balance of the body.
An isometric contraction occurs as the muscle produces tension without changing the angle of a skeletal joint.
Isometric contractions involve sarcomere shortening and increasing muscle tension, but do not move a load, as the
force produced cannot overcome the resistance provided by the load. For example, if one attempts to lift a hand
weight that is too heavy, there will be sarcomere activation and shortening to a point, and ever-increasing muscle
tension, but no change in the angle of the elbow joint. In everyday living, isometric contractions are active in
maintaining posture and maintaining bone and joint stability. However, holding your head in an upright position
occurs not because the muscles cannot move the head, but because the goal is to remain stationary and not
produce movement. Most actions of the body are the result of a combination of isotonic and isometric contractions
working together to produce a wide range of outcomes (Figure 10.13).
Because DMD is caused by a mutation in the gene that codes for dystrophin, it was thought that introducing
healthy myoblasts into patients might be an effective treatment. Myoblasts are the embryonic cells responsible
for muscle development, and ideally, they would carry healthy genes that could produce the dystrophin needed
for normal muscle contraction. This approach has been largely unsuccessful in humans. A recent approach has
involved attempting to boost the muscle’s production of utrophin, a protein similar to dystrophin that may be
able to assume the role of dystrophin and prevent cellular damage from occurring.
372
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 10.13
Types of Muscle Contractions
During isotonic contractions, muscle length changes to move a load. During isometric
contractions, muscle length does not change because the load exceeds the tension the muscle can generate.
All of these muscle activities are under the exquisite control of the nervous system. Neural control regulates
concentric, eccentric and isometric contractions, muscle fiber recruitment, and muscle tone. A crucial aspect of
nervous system control of skeletal muscles is the role of motor units.
Motor Units
As you have learned, every skeletal muscle fiber must be innervated by the axon terminal of a motor neuron in order
to contract. Each muscle fiber is innervated by only one motor neuron. The actual group of muscle fibers in a muscle
innervated by a single motor neuron is called a motor unit. The size of a motor unit is variable depending on the
nature of the muscle.
A small motor unit is an arrangement where a single motor neuron supplies a small number of muscle fibers in a
muscle. Small motor units permit very fine motor control of the muscle. The best example in humans is the small
motor units of the extraocular eye muscles that move the eyeballs. There are thousands of muscle fibers in each
muscle, but every six or so fibers are supplied by a single motor neuron, as the axons branch to form synaptic
connections at their individual NMJs. This allows for exquisite control of eye movements so that both eyes can
quickly focus on the same object. Small motor units are also involved in the many fine movements of the fingers and
thumb of the hand for grasping, texting, etc.
10.4 • Nervous System Control of Muscle Tension
373
A large motor unit is an arrangement where a single motor neuron supplies a large number of muscle fibers in a
muscle. Large motor units are concerned with simple, or “gross,” movements, such as powerfully extending the
knee joint. The best example is the large motor units of the thigh muscles or back muscles, where a single motor
neuron will supply thousands of muscle fibers in a muscle, as its axon splits into thousands of branches.
There is a wide range of motor units within many skeletal muscles, which gives the nervous system a wide range of
control over the muscle. The small motor units in the muscle will have smaller, lower-threshold motor neurons that
are more excitable, firing first to their skeletal muscle fibers, which also tend to be the smallest. Activation of these
smaller motor units, results in a relatively small degree of contractile strength (tension) generated in the muscle. As
more strength is needed, larger motor units, with bigger, higher-threshold motor neurons are enlisted to activate
larger muscle fibers. This increasing activation of motor units produces an increase in muscle contraction known as
recruitment. As more motor units are recruited, the muscle contraction grows progressively stronger. In some
muscles, the largest motor units may generate a contractile force of 50 times more than the smallest motor units in
the muscle. This allows a feather to be picked up using the biceps brachii arm muscle with minimal force, and a
heavy weight to be lifted by the same muscle by recruiting the largest motor units.
When necessary, the maximal number of motor units in a muscle can be recruited simultaneously, producing the
maximum force of contraction for that muscle, but this cannot last for very long because of the energy requirements
to sustain the contraction. To prevent complete muscle fatigue, motor units are generally not all simultaneously
active, but instead some motor units rest while others are active, which allows for longer muscle contractions. The
nervous system uses recruitment as a mechanism to efficiently utilize a skeletal muscle.
The Length-Tension Range of a Sarcomere
When a skeletal muscle fiber contracts, myosin heads attach to actin to form cross-bridges followed by the thin
filaments sliding over the thick filaments as the heads pull the actin, and this results in sarcomere shortening,
creating the tension of the muscle contraction. The cross-bridges can only form where thin and thick filaments
already overlap, so that the length of the sarcomere has a direct influence on the force generated when the
sarcomere shortens. This is called the length-tension relationship.
The ideal length of a sarcomere to produce maximal tension occurs at 80 percent to 120 percent of its resting
length, with 100 percent being the state where the medial edges of the thin filaments are just at the most-medial
myosin heads of the thick filaments (Figure 10.14). This length maximizes the overlap of actin-binding sites and
myosin heads. If a sarcomere is stretched past this ideal length (beyond 120 percent), thick and thin filaments do
not overlap sufficiently, which results in less tension produced. If a sarcomere is shortened beyond 80 percent, the
zone of overlap is reduced with the thin filaments jutting beyond the last of the myosin heads and shrinks the H
zone, which is normally composed of myosin tails. Eventually, there is nowhere else for the thin filaments to go and
the amount of tension is diminished. If the muscle is stretched to the point where thick and thin filaments do not
overlap at all, no cross-bridges can be formed, and no tension is produced in that sarcomere. This amount of
stretching does not usually occur, as accessory proteins and connective tissue oppose extreme stretching.
374
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 10.14
The Ideal Length of a Sarcomere
Sarcomeres produce maximal tension when thick and thin filaments overlap between
about 80 percent to 120 percent.
The Frequency of Motor Neuron Stimulation
A single action potential from a motor neuron will produce a single contraction in the muscle fibers of its motor unit.
This isolated contraction is called a twitch. A twitch can last for a few milliseconds or 100 milliseconds, depending
on the muscle type. The tension produced by a single twitch can be measured by a myogram, an instrument that
measures the amount of tension produced over time (Figure 10.15). Each twitch undergoes three phases. The first
phase is the latent period, during which the action potential is being propagated along the sarcolemma and Ca++
ions are released from the SR. This is the phase during which excitation and contraction are being coupled but
contraction has yet to occur. The contraction phase occurs next. The Ca++ ions in the sarcoplasm have bound to
troponin, tropomyosin has shifted away from actin-binding sites, cross-bridges have formed, and sarcomeres are
actively shortening to the point of peak tension. The last phase is the relaxation phase, when tension decreases as
contraction stops. Ca++ ions are pumped out of the sarcoplasm into the SR, and cross-bridge cycling stops, returning
the muscle fibers to their resting state.
FIGURE 10.15
A Myogram of a Muscle Twitch
A single muscle twitch has a latent period, a contraction phase when tension increases,
and a relaxation phase when tension decreases. During the latent period, the action potential is being propagated along the sarcolemma.
During the contraction phase, Ca++ ions in the sarcoplasm bind to troponin, tropomyosin moves from actin-binding sites, cross-bridges
form, and sarcomeres shorten. During the relaxation phase, tension decreases as Ca++ ions are pumped out of the sarcoplasm and cross-
bridge cycling stops.
10.4 • Nervous System Control of Muscle Tension
375
Although a person can experience a muscle “twitch,” a single twitch does not produce any significant muscle
activity in a living body. A series of action potentials to the muscle fibers is necessary to produce a muscle
contraction that can produce work. Normal muscle contraction is more sustained, and it can be modified by input
from the nervous system to produce varying amounts of force; this is called a graded muscle response. The
frequency of action potentials (nerve impulses) from a motor neuron and the number of motor neurons transmitting
action potentials both affect the tension produced in skeletal muscle.
The rate at which a motor neuron fires action potentials affects the tension produced in the skeletal muscle. If the
fibers are stimulated while a previous twitch is still occurring, the second twitch will be stronger. This response is
called wave summation, because the excitation-contraction coupling effects of successive motor neuron signaling
is summed, or added together (Figure 10.16a). At the molecular level, summation occurs because the second
stimulus triggers the release of more Ca++ ions, which become available to activate additional sarcomeres while the
muscle is still contracting from the first stimulus. Summation results in greater contraction of the motor unit.
FIGURE 10.16
Wave Summation and Tetanus
(a) The excitation-contraction coupling effects of successive motor neuron signaling is
added together which is referred to as wave summation. The bottom of each wave, the end of the relaxation phase, represents the point of
stimulus. (b) When the stimulus frequency is so high that the relaxation phase disappears completely, the contractions become continuous;
this is called tetanus.
If the frequency of motor neuron signaling increases, summation and subsequent muscle tension in the motor unit
continues to rise until it reaches a peak point. The tension at this point is about three to four times greater than the
tension of a single twitch, a state referred to as incomplete tetanus. During incomplete tetanus, the muscle goes
through quick cycles of contraction with a short relaxation phase for each. If the stimulus frequency is so high that
the relaxation phase disappears completely, contractions become continuous in a process called complete tetanus
(Figure 10.16b).
During tetanus, the concentration of Ca++ ions in the sarcoplasm allows virtually all of the sarcomeres to form cross-
bridges and shorten, so that a contraction can continue uninterrupted (until the muscle fatigues and can no longer
produce tension).
Treppe
When a skeletal muscle has been dormant for an extended period and then activated to contract, with all other
things being equal, the initial contractions generate about one-half the force of later contractions. The muscle
tension increases in a graded manner that to some looks like a set of stairs. This tension increase is called treppe, a
condition where muscle contractions become more efficient. It’s also known as the “staircase effect” (Figure
10.17).
376
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 10.17
Treppe
When muscle tension increases in a graded manner that looks like a set of stairs, it is called treppe. The bottom
of each wave represents the point of stimulus.
It is believed that treppe results from a higher concentration of Ca++ in the sarcoplasm resulting from the steady
stream of signals from the motor neuron. It can only be maintained with adequate ATP.
Muscle Tone
Skeletal muscles are rarely completely relaxed, or flaccid. Even if a muscle is not producing movement, it is
contracted a small amount to maintain its contractile proteins and produce muscle tone. The tension produced by
muscle tone allows muscles to continually stabilize joints and maintain posture.
Muscle tone is accomplished by a complex interaction between the nervous system and skeletal muscles that
results in the activation of a few motor units at a time, most likely in a cyclical manner. In this manner, muscles
never fatigue completely, as some motor units can recover while others are active.
The absence of the low-level contractions that lead to muscle tone is referred to as hypotonia, and can result from
damage to parts of the central nervous system (CNS), such as the cerebellum, or from loss of innervations to a
skeletal muscle, as in poliomyelitis. Hypotonic muscles have a flaccid appearance and display functional
impairments, such as weak reflexes. Conversely, excessive muscle tone is referred to as hypertonia, accompanied
by hyperreflexia (excessive reflex responses), often the result of damage to upper motor neurons in the CNS.
Hypertonia can present with muscle rigidity (as seen in Parkinson’s disease) or spasticity, a phasic change in muscle
tone, where a limb will “snap” back from passive stretching (as seen in some strokes).
10.5 Types of Muscle Fibers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the types of skeletal muscle fibers
•
Explain fast and slow muscle fibers
Two criteria to consider when classifying the types of muscle fibers are how fast some fibers contract relative to
others, and how fibers produce ATP. Using these criteria, there are three main types of skeletal muscle fibers. Slow
oxidative (SO) fibers contract relatively slowly and use aerobic respiration (oxygen and glucose) to produce ATP.
Fast oxidative (FO) fibers have fast contractions and primarily use aerobic respiration, but because they may switch
to anaerobic respiration (glycolysis), can fatigue more quickly than SO fibers. Lastly, fast glycolytic (FG) fibers have
fast contractions and primarily use anaerobic glycolysis. The FG fibers fatigue more quickly than the others. Most
skeletal muscles in a human contain(s) all three types, although in varying proportions.
The speed of contraction is dependent on how quickly myosin’s ATPase hydrolyzes ATP to produce cross-bridge
action. Fast fibers hydrolyze ATP approximately twice as quickly as slow fibers, resulting in much quicker cross-
bridge cycling (which pulls the thin filaments toward the center of the sarcomeres at a faster rate). The primary
metabolic pathway used by a muscle fiber determines whether the fiber is classified as oxidative or glycolytic. If a
fiber primarily produces ATP through aerobic pathways it is oxidative. More ATP can be produced during each
10.5 • Types of Muscle Fibers
377
metabolic cycle, making the fiber more resistant to fatigue. Glycolytic fibers primarily create ATP through anaerobic
glycolysis, which produces less ATP per cycle. As a result, glycolytic fibers fatigue at a quicker rate.
The oxidative fibers contain many more mitochondria than the glycolytic fibers, because aerobic metabolism, which
uses oxygen (O2) in the metabolic pathway, occurs in the mitochondria. The SO fibers possess a large number of
mitochondria and are capable of contracting for longer periods because of the large amount of ATP they can
produce, but they have a relatively small diameter and do not produce a large amount of tension. SO fibers are
extensively supplied with blood capillaries to supply O2 from the red blood cells in the bloodstream. The SO fibers
also possess myoglobin, an O2-carrying molecule similar to O2-carrying hemoglobin in the red blood cells. The
myoglobin stores some of the needed O2 within the fibers themselves (and gives SO fibers their red color). All of
these features allow SO fibers to produce large quantities of ATP, which can sustain muscle activity without fatiguing
for long periods of time.
The fact that SO fibers can function for long periods without fatiguing makes them useful in maintaining posture,
producing isometric contractions, stabilizing bones and joints, and making small movements that happen often but
do not require large amounts of energy. They do not produce high tension, and thus they are not used for powerful,
fast movements that require high amounts of energy and rapid cross-bridge cycling.
FO fibers are sometimes called intermediate fibers because they possess characteristics that are intermediate
between fast fibers and slow fibers. They produce ATP relatively quickly, more quickly than SO fibers, and thus can
produce relatively high amounts of tension. They are oxidative because they produce ATP aerobically, possess high
amounts of mitochondria, and do not fatigue quickly. However, FO fibers do not possess significant myoglobin,
giving them a lighter color than the red SO fibers. FO fibers are used primarily for movements, such as walking, that
require more energy than postural control but less energy than an explosive movement, such as sprinting. FO fibers
are useful for this type of movement because they produce more tension than SO fibers but they are more fatigue-
resistant than FG fibers.
FG fibers primarily use anaerobic glycolysis as their ATP source. They have a large diameter and possess high
amounts of glycogen, which is used in glycolysis to generate ATP quickly to produce high levels of tension. Because
they do not primarily use aerobic metabolism, they do not possess substantial numbers of mitochondria or
significant amounts of myoglobin and therefore have a white color. FG fibers are used to produce rapid, forceful
contractions to make quick, powerful movements. These fibers fatigue quickly, permitting them to only be used for
short periods. Most muscles possess a mixture of each fiber type. The predominant fiber type in a muscle is
determined by the primary function of the muscle.
10.6 Exercise and Muscle Performance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe hypertrophy and atrophy
•
Explain how resistance exercise builds muscle
•
Explain how performance-enhancing substances affect muscle
Physical training alters the appearance of skeletal muscles and can produce changes in muscle performance.
Conversely, a lack of use can result in decreased performance and muscle appearance. Although muscle cells can
change in size, new cells are not formed when muscles grow. Instead, structural proteins are added to muscle fibers
in a process called hypertrophy, so cell diameter increases. The reverse, when structural proteins are lost and
muscle mass decreases, is called atrophy. Age-related muscle atrophy is called sarcopenia. Cellular components of
muscles can also undergo changes in response to changes in muscle use.
Endurance Exercise
Slow fibers are predominantly used in endurance exercises that require little force but involve numerous repetitions.
The aerobic metabolism used by slow-twitch fibers allows them to maintain contractions over long periods.
Endurance training modifies these slow fibers to make them even more efficient by producing more mitochondria to
enable more aerobic metabolism and more ATP production. Endurance exercise can also increase the amount of
myoglobin in a cell, as increased aerobic respiration increases the need for oxygen. Myoglobin is found in the
378
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
sarcoplasm and acts as an oxygen storage supply for the mitochondria.
The training can trigger the formation of more extensive capillary networks around the fiber, a process called
angiogenesis, to supply oxygen and remove metabolic waste. To allow these capillary networks to supply the deep
portions of the muscle, muscle mass does not greatly increase in order to maintain a smaller area for the diffusion of
nutrients and gases. All of these cellular changes result in the ability to sustain low levels of muscle contractions for
greater periods without fatiguing.
The proportion of SO muscle fibers in muscle determines the suitability of that muscle for endurance, and may
benefit those participating in endurance activities. Postural muscles have a large number of SO fibers and relatively
few FO and FG fibers, to keep the back straight (Figure 10.18). Endurance athletes, like marathon-runners also
would benefit from a larger proportion of SO fibers, but it is unclear if the most-successful marathoners are those
with naturally high numbers of SO fibers, or whether the most successful marathon runners develop high numbers
of SO fibers with repetitive training. Endurance training can result in overuse injuries such as stress fractures and
joint and tendon inflammation.
FIGURE 10.18
Marathoners
Long-distance runners have a large number of SO fibers and relatively few FO and FG fibers. (credit:
“Tseo2”/Wikimedia Commons)
Resistance Exercise
Resistance exercises, as opposed to endurance exercise, require large amounts of FG fibers to produce short,
powerful movements that are not repeated over long periods. The high rates of ATP hydrolysis and cross-bridge
formation in FG fibers result in powerful muscle contractions. Muscles used for power have a higher ratio of FG to
SO/FO fibers, and trained athletes possess even higher levels of FG fibers in their muscles. Resistance exercise
affects muscles by increasing the formation of myofibrils, thereby increasing the thickness of muscle fibers. This
added structure causes hypertrophy, or the enlargement of muscles, exemplified by the large skeletal muscles seen
in body builders and other athletes (Figure 10.19). Because this muscular enlargement is achieved by the addition
of structural proteins, athletes trying to build muscle mass often ingest large amounts of protein.
10.6 • Exercise and Muscle Performance
379
FIGURE 10.19
Hypertrophy
Body builders have a large number of FG fibers and relatively few FO and SO fibers. (credit: Lin Mei/flickr)
Except for the hypertrophy that follows an increase in the number of sarcomeres and myofibrils in a skeletal muscle,
the cellular changes observed during endurance training do not usually occur with resistance training. There is
usually no significant increase in mitochondria or capillary density. However, resistance training does increase the
development of connective tissue, which adds to the overall mass of the muscle and helps to contain muscles as
they produce increasingly powerful contractions. Tendons also become stronger to prevent tendon damage, as the
force produced by muscles is transferred to tendons that attach the muscle to bone.
For effective strength training, the intensity of the exercise must continually be increased. For instance, continued
weight lifting without increasing the weight of the load does not increase muscle size. To produce ever-greater
results, the weights lifted must become increasingly heavier, making it more difficult for muscles to move the load.
The muscle then adapts to this heavier load, and an even heavier load must be used if even greater muscle mass is
desired.
If done improperly, resistance training can lead to overuse injuries of the muscle, tendon, or bone. These injuries
can occur if the load is too heavy or if the muscles are not given sufficient time between workouts to recover or if
joints are not aligned properly during the exercises. Cellular damage to muscle fibers that occurs after intense
exercise includes damage to the sarcolemma and myofibrils. This muscle damage contributes to the feeling of
soreness after strenuous exercise, but muscles gain mass as this damage is repaired, and additional structural
proteins are added to replace the damaged ones. Overworking skeletal muscles can also lead to tendon damage and
even skeletal damage if the load is too great for the muscles to bear.
Performance-Enhancing Substances
Some athletes attempt to boost their performance by using various agents that may enhance muscle performance.
Anabolic steroids are one of the more widely known agents used to boost muscle mass and increase power output.
Anabolic steroids are a form of testosterone, a male sex hormone that stimulates muscle formation, leading to
increased muscle mass.
Endurance athletes may also try to boost the availability of oxygen to muscles to increase aerobic respiration by
using substances such as erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone normally produced in the kidneys, which triggers the
production of red blood cells. The extra oxygen carried by these blood cells can then be used by muscles for aerobic
respiration. Human growth hormone (hGH) is another supplement, and although it can facilitate building muscle
mass, its main role is to promote the healing of muscle and other tissues after strenuous exercise. Increased hGH
may allow for faster recovery after muscle damage, reducing the rest required after exercise, and allowing for more
sustained high-level performance.
Although performance-enhancing substances often do improve performance, most are banned by governing bodies
in sports and are illegal for nonmedical purposes. Their use to enhance performance raises ethical issues of
cheating because they give users an unfair advantage over nonusers. A greater concern, however, is that their use
carries serious health risks. The side effects of these substances are often significant, nonreversible, and in some
cases fatal. The physiological strain caused by these substances is often greater than what the body can handle,
380
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
leading to effects that are unpredictable and dangerous. Anabolic steroid use has been linked to infertility,
aggressive behavior, cardiovascular disease, and brain cancer.
Similarly, some athletes have used creatine to increase power output. Creatine phosphate provides quick bursts of
ATP to muscles in the initial stages of contraction. Increasing the amount of creatine available to cells is thought to
produce more ATP and therefore increase explosive power output, although its effectiveness as a supplement has
been questioned.
10.7 Cardiac Muscle Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe intercalated discs and gap junctions
•
Describe a desmosome
Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart. Highly coordinated contractions of cardiac muscle pump blood into
the vessels of the circulatory system. Similar to skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is striated and organized into
Everyday Connection
Aging and Muscle Tissue
Although atrophy due to disuse can often be reversed with exercise, muscle atrophy with age, referred to as
sarcopenia, is irreversible. This is a primary reason why even highly trained athletes succumb to declining
performance with age. This decline is noticeable in athletes whose sports require strength and powerful
movements, such as sprinting, whereas the effects of age are less noticeable in endurance athletes such as
marathon runners or long-distance cyclists. As muscles age, muscle fibers die, and they are replaced by
connective tissue and adipose tissue (Figure 10.20). Because those tissues cannot contract and generate force
as muscle can, muscles lose the ability to produce powerful contractions. The decline in muscle mass causes a
loss of strength, including the strength required for posture and mobility. This may be caused by a reduction in
FG fibers that hydrolyze ATP quickly to produce short, powerful contractions. Muscles in older people
sometimes possess greater numbers of SO fibers, which are responsible for longer contractions and do not
produce powerful movements. There may also be a reduction in the size of motor units, resulting in fewer fibers
being stimulated and less muscle tension being produced.
FIGURE 10.20
Atrophy
Muscle mass is reduced as muscles atrophy with disuse.
Sarcopenia can be delayed to some extent by exercise, as training adds structural proteins and causes cellular
changes that can offset the effects of atrophy. Increased exercise can produce greater numbers of cellular
mitochondria, increase capillary density, and increase the mass and strength of connective tissue. The effects of
age-related atrophy are especially pronounced in people who are sedentary, as the loss of muscle cells is
displayed as functional impairments such as trouble with locomotion, balance, and posture. This can lead to a
decrease in quality of life and medical problems, such as joint problems because the muscles that stabilize
bones and joints are weakened. Problems with locomotion and balance can also cause various injuries due to
falls.
10.7 • Cardiac Muscle Tissue
381
sarcomeres, possessing the same banding organization as skeletal muscle (Figure 10.21). However, cardiac muscle
fibers are shorter than skeletal muscle fibers and usually contain only one nucleus, which is located in the central
region of the cell. Cardiac muscle fibers also possess many mitochondria and myoglobin, as ATP is produced
primarily through aerobic metabolism. Cardiac muscle fibers cells also are extensively branched and are connected
to one another at their ends by intercalated discs. An intercalated disc allows the cardiac muscle cells to contract in
a wave-like pattern so that the heart can work as a pump.
FIGURE 10.21
Cardiac Muscle Tissue
Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/cardmuscleMG) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
Intercalated discs are part of the sarcolemma and contain two structures important in cardiac muscle contraction:
gap junctions and desmosomes. A gap junction forms channels between adjacent cardiac muscle fibers that allow
the depolarizing current produced by cations to flow from one cardiac muscle cell to the next. This joining is called
electric coupling, and in cardiac muscle it allows the quick transmission of action potentials and the coordinated
contraction of the entire heart. This network of electrically connected cardiac muscle cells creates a functional unit
of contraction called a syncytium. The remainder of the intercalated disc is composed of desmosomes. A
desmosome is a cell structure that anchors the ends of cardiac muscle fibers together so the cells do not pull apart
during the stress of individual fibers contracting (Figure 10.22).
FIGURE 10.22
Cardiac Muscle
Intercalated discs are part of the cardiac muscle sarcolemma and they contain gap junctions and
desmosomes.
382
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
Contractions of the heart (heartbeats) are controlled by specialized cardiac muscle cells called pacemaker cells that
directly control heart rate. Although cardiac muscle cannot be consciously controlled, the pacemaker cells respond
to signals from the autonomic nervous system (ANS) to speed up or slow down the heart rate. The pacemaker cells
can also respond to various hormones that modulate heart rate to control blood pressure.
The wave of contraction that allows the heart to work as a unit, called a functional syncytium, begins with the
pacemaker cells. This group of cells is self-excitable and able to depolarize to threshold and fire action potentials on
their own, a feature called autorhythmicity; they do this at set intervals which determine heart rate. Because they
are connected with gap junctions to surrounding muscle fibers and the specialized fibers of the heart’s conduction
system, the pacemaker cells are able to transfer the depolarization to the other cardiac muscle fibers in a manner
that allows the heart to contract in a coordinated manner.
Another feature of cardiac muscle is its relatively long action potentials in its fibers, having a sustained
depolarization “plateau.” The plateau is produced by Ca++ entry though voltage-gated calcium channels in the
sarcolemma of cardiac muscle fibers. This sustained depolarization (and Ca++ entry) provides for a longer
contraction than is produced by an action potential in skeletal muscle. Unlike skeletal muscle, a large percentage of
the Ca++ that initiates contraction in cardiac muscles comes from outside the cell rather than from the SR.
10.8 Smooth Muscle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe a dense body
•
Explain how smooth muscle works with internal organs and passageways through the body
•
Explain how smooth muscles differ from skeletal and cardiac muscles
•
Explain the difference between single-unit and multi-unit smooth muscle
Smooth muscle (so-named because the cells do not have striations) is present in the walls of hollow organs like the
urinary bladder, uterus, stomach, intestines, and in the walls of passageways, such as the arteries and veins of the
circulatory system, and the tracts of the respiratory, urinary, and reproductive systems (Figure 10.23ab). Smooth
muscle is also present in the eyes, where it functions to change the size of the iris and alter the shape of the lens;
and in the skin where it causes hair to stand erect in response to cold temperature or fear.
10.8 • Smooth Muscle
383
FIGURE 10.23
Smooth Muscle Tissue
Smooth muscle tissue is found around organs in the digestive, respiratory, reproductive tracts
and the iris of the eye. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/smoothmuscMG) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
Smooth muscle fibers are spindle-shaped (wide in the middle and tapered at both ends, somewhat like a football)
and have a single nucleus; they range from about 30 to 200 μm (thousands of times shorter than skeletal muscle
fibers), and they produce their own connective tissue, endomysium. Although they do not have striations and
sarcomeres, smooth muscle fibers do have actin and myosin contractile proteins, and thick and thin filaments.
These thin filaments are anchored by dense bodies. A dense body is analogous to the Z-discs of skeletal and cardiac
muscle fibers and is fastened to the sarcolemma. Calcium ions are supplied by the SR in the fibers and by
sequestration from the extracellular fluid through membrane indentations called calveoli.
Because smooth muscle cells do not contain troponin, cross-bridge formation is not regulated by the troponin-
tropomyosin complex but instead by the regulatory protein calmodulin. In a smooth muscle fiber, external Ca++ ions
passing through opened calcium channels in the sarcolemma, and additional Ca++ released from SR, bind to
calmodulin. The Ca++-calmodulin complex then activates an enzyme called myosin (light chain) kinase, which, in
turn, activates the myosin heads by phosphorylating them (converting ATP to ADP and Pi, with the Pi attaching to the
head). The heads can then attach to actin-binding sites and pull on the thin filaments. The thin filaments also are
anchored to the dense bodies; the structures invested in the inner membrane of the sarcolemma (at adherens
junctions) that also have cord-like intermediate filaments attached to them. When the thin filaments slide past the
thick filaments, they pull on the dense bodies, structures tethered to the sarcolemma, which then pull on the
intermediate filaments networks throughout the sarcoplasm. This arrangement causes the entire muscle fiber to
contract in a manner whereby the ends are pulled toward the center, causing the midsection to bulge in a corkscrew
384
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
motion (Figure 10.24).
FIGURE 10.24
Muscle Contraction
The dense bodies and intermediate filaments are networked through the sarcoplasm, which cause
the muscle fiber to contract.
Although smooth muscle contraction relies on the presence of Ca++ ions, smooth muscle fibers have a much smaller
diameter than skeletal muscle cells. T-tubules are not required to reach the interior of the cell and therefore not
necessary to transmit an action potential deep into the fiber. Smooth muscle fibers have a limited calcium-storing
SR but have calcium channels in the sarcolemma (similar to cardiac muscle fibers) that open during the action
potential along the sarcolemma. The influx of extracellular Ca++ ions, which diffuse into the sarcoplasm to reach the
calmodulin, accounts for most of the Ca++ that triggers contraction of a smooth muscle cell.
Muscle contraction continues until ATP-dependent calcium pumps actively transport Ca++ ions back into the SR and
out of the cell. However, a low concentration of calcium remains in the sarcoplasm to maintain muscle tone. This
remaining calcium keeps the muscle slightly contracted, which is important in certain tracts and around blood
vessels.
Because most smooth muscles must function for long periods without rest, their power output is relatively low, but
contractions can continue without using large amounts of energy. Some smooth muscle can also maintain
contractions even as Ca++ is removed and myosin kinase is inactivated/dephosphorylated. This can happen as a
subset of cross-bridges between myosin heads and actin, called latch-bridges, keep the thick and thin filaments
linked together for a prolonged period, and without the need for ATP. This allows for the maintaining of muscle
“tone” in smooth muscle that lines arterioles and other visceral organs with very little energy expenditure.
Smooth muscle is not under voluntary control; thus, it is called involuntary muscle. The triggers for smooth muscle
contraction include hormones, neural stimulation by the ANS, and local factors. In certain locations, such as the
walls of visceral organs, stretching the muscle can trigger its contraction (the stress-relaxation response).
Axons of neurons in the ANS do not form the highly organized NMJs with smooth muscle, as seen between motor
neurons and skeletal muscle fibers. Instead, there is a series of neurotransmitter-filled bulges called varicosities as
an axon courses through smooth muscle, loosely forming motor units (Figure 10.25). A varicosity releases
neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. Also, visceral muscle in the walls of the hollow organs (except the heart)
contains pacesetter cells. A pacesetter cell can spontaneously trigger action potentials and contractions in the
muscle.
FIGURE 10.25
Motor Units
A series of axon-like swelling, called varicosities or “boutons,” from autonomic neurons form motor units
through the smooth muscle.
10.8 • Smooth Muscle
385
Smooth muscle is organized in two ways: as single-unit smooth muscle, which is much more common; and as
multiunit smooth muscle. The two types have different locations in the body and have different characteristics.
Single-unit muscle has its muscle fibers joined by gap junctions so that the muscle contracts as a single unit. This
type of smooth muscle is found in the walls of all visceral organs except the heart (which has cardiac muscle in its
walls), and so it is commonly called visceral muscle. Because the muscle fibers are not constrained by the
organization and stretchability limits of sarcomeres, visceral smooth muscle has a stress-relaxation response. This
means that as the muscle of a hollow organ is stretched when it fills, the mechanical stress of the stretching will
trigger contraction, but this is immediately followed by relaxation so that the organ does not empty its contents
prematurely. This is important for hollow organs, such as the stomach or urinary bladder, which continuously expand
as they fill. The smooth muscle around these organs also can maintain a muscle tone when the organ empties and
shrinks, a feature that prevents “flabbiness” in the empty organ. In general, visceral smooth muscle produces slow,
steady contractions that allow substances, such as food in the digestive tract, to move through the body.
Multiunit smooth muscle cells rarely possess gap junctions, and thus are not electrically coupled. As a result,
contraction does not spread from one cell to the next, but is instead confined to the cell that was originally
stimulated. Stimuli for multiunit smooth muscles come from autonomic nerves or hormones but not from stretching.
This type of tissue is found around large blood vessels, in the respiratory airways, and in the eyes.
Hyperplasia in Smooth Muscle
Similar to skeletal and cardiac muscle cells, smooth muscle can undergo hypertrophy to increase in size. Unlike
other muscle, smooth muscle can also divide to produce more cells, a process called hyperplasia. This can most
evidently be observed in the uterus at puberty, which responds to increased estrogen levels by producing more
uterine smooth muscle fibers, and greatly increases the size of the myometrium.
10.9 Development and Regeneration of Muscle Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the function of satellite cells
•
Define fibrosis
•
Explain which muscle has the greatest regeneration ability
Most muscle tissue of the body arises from embryonic mesoderm. Paraxial mesodermal cells adjacent to the neural
tube form blocks of cells called somites. Skeletal muscles, excluding those of the head and limbs, develop from
mesodermal somites, whereas skeletal muscle in the head and limbs develop from general mesoderm. Somites give
rise to myoblasts. A myoblast is a muscle-forming stem cell that migrates to different regions in the body and then
fuse(s) to form a syncytium, or myotube. As a myotube is formed from many different myoblast cells, it contains
many nuclei, but has a continuous cytoplasm. This is why skeletal muscle cells are multinucleate, as the nucleus of
each contributing myoblast remains intact in the mature skeletal muscle cell. However, cardiac and smooth muscle
cells are not multinucleate because the myoblasts that form their cells do not fuse.
Gap junctions develop in the cardiac and single-unit smooth muscle in the early stages of development. In skeletal
muscles, ACh receptors are initially present along most of the surface of the myoblasts, but spinal nerve innervation
causes the release of growth factors that stimulate the formation of motor end-plates and NMJs. As neurons
become active, electrical signals that are sent through the muscle influence the distribution of slow and fast fibers in
the muscle.
Although the number of muscle cells is set during development, satellite cells help to repair skeletal muscle cells. A
satellite cell is similar to a myoblast because it is a type of stem cell; however, satellite cells are incorporated into
muscle cells and facilitate the protein synthesis required for repair and growth. These cells are located outside the
sarcolemma and are stimulated to grow and fuse with muscle cells by growth factors that are released by muscle
fibers under certain forms of stress. Satellite cells can regenerate muscle fibers to a very limited extent, but they
primarily help to repair damage in living cells. If a cell is damaged to a greater extent than can be repaired by
satellite cells, the muscle fibers are replaced by scar tissue in a process called fibrosis. Because scar tissue cannot
contract, muscle that has sustained significant damage loses strength and cannot produce the same amount of
power or endurance as it could before being damaged.
386
10 • Muscle Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
Smooth muscle tissue can regenerate from a type of stem cell called a pericyte, which is found in some small blood
vessels. Pericytes allow smooth muscle cells to regenerate and repair much more readily than skeletal and cardiac
muscle tissue. Similar to skeletal muscle tissue, cardiac muscle does not regenerate to a great extent. Dead cardiac
muscle tissue is replaced by scar tissue, which cannot contract. As scar tissue accumulates, the heart loses its
ability to pump because of the loss of contractile power. However, some minor regeneration may occur due to stem
cells found in the blood that occasionally enter cardiac tissue.
CAREER CONNECTION
Physical Therapist
As muscle cells die, they are not regenerated but instead are replaced by connective tissue and adipose tissue,
which do not possess the contractile abilities of muscle tissue. Muscles atrophy when they are not used, and over
time if atrophy is prolonged, muscle cells die. It is therefore important that those who are susceptible to muscle
atrophy exercise to maintain muscle function and prevent the complete loss of muscle tissue. In extreme cases,
when movement is not possible, electrical stimulation can be introduced to a muscle from an external source. This
acts as a substitute for endogenous neural stimulation, stimulating the muscle to contract and preventing the loss of
proteins that occurs with a lack of use.
Physiotherapists work with patients to maintain muscles. They are trained to target muscles susceptible to atrophy,
and to prescribe and monitor exercises designed to stimulate those muscles. There are various causes of atrophy,
including mechanical injury, disease, and age. After breaking a limb or undergoing surgery, muscle use is impaired
and can lead to disuse atrophy. If the muscles are not exercised, this atrophy can lead to long-term muscle
weakness. A stroke can also cause muscle impairment by interrupting neural stimulation to certain muscles.
Without neural inputs, these muscles do not contract and thus begin to lose structural proteins. Exercising these
muscles can help to restore muscle function and minimize functional impairments. Age-related muscle loss is also a
target of physical therapy, as exercise can reduce the effects of age-related atrophy and improve muscle function.
The goal of a physiotherapist is to improve physical functioning and reduce functional impairments; this is achieved
by understanding the cause of muscle impairment and assessing the capabilities of a patient, after which a program
to enhance these capabilities is designed. Some factors that are assessed include strength, balance, and endurance,
which are continually monitored as exercises are introduced to track improvements in muscle function.
Physiotherapists can also instruct patients on the proper use of equipment, such as crutches, and assess whether
someone has sufficient strength to use the equipment and when they can function without it.
10.9 • Development and Regeneration of Muscle Tissue
387
Key Terms
acetylcholine (ACh)
neurotransmitter that binds at a
motor end-plate to trigger depolarization
actin
protein that makes up most of the thin
myofilaments in a sarcomere muscle fiber
action potential
change in voltage of a cell
membrane in response to a stimulus that results in
transmission of an electrical signal; unique to
neurons and muscle fibers
aerobic respiration
production of ATP in the
presence of oxygen
angiogenesis
formation of blood capillary networks
aponeurosis
broad, tendon-like sheet of connective
tissue that attaches a skeletal muscle to another
skeletal muscle or to a bone
ATPase
enzyme that hydrolyzes ATP to ADP
atrophy
loss of structural proteins from muscle fibers
autorhythmicity
heart’s ability to control its own
contractions
calmodulin
regulatory protein that facilitates
contraction in smooth muscles
cardiac muscle
striated muscle found in the heart;
joined to one another at intercalated discs and
under the regulation of pacemaker cells, which
contract as one unit to pump blood through the
circulatory system. Cardiac muscle is under
involuntary control.
concentric contraction
muscle contraction that
shortens the muscle to move a load
contractility
ability to shorten (contract) forcibly
contraction phase
twitch contraction phase when
tension increases
creatine phosphate
phosphagen used to store
energy from ATP and transfer it to muscle
dense body
sarcoplasmic structure that attaches to
the sarcolemma and shortens the muscle as thin
filaments slide past thick filaments
depolarize
to reduce the voltage difference between
the inside and outside of a cell’s plasma membrane
(the sarcolemma for a muscle fiber), making the
inside less negative than at rest
desmosome
cell structure that anchors the ends of
cardiac muscle fibers to allow contraction to occur
eccentric contraction
muscle contraction that
lengthens the muscle as the tension is diminished
elasticity
ability to stretch and rebound
endomysium
loose, and well-hydrated connective
tissue covering each muscle fiber in a skeletal
muscle
epimysium
outer layer of connective tissue around a
skeletal muscle
excitability
ability to undergo neural stimulation
excitation-contraction coupling
sequence of events
from motor neuron signaling to a skeletal muscle
fiber to contraction of the fiber’s sarcomeres
extensibility
ability to lengthen (extend)
fascicle
bundle of muscle fibers within a skeletal
muscle
fast glycolytic (FG)
muscle fiber that primarily uses
anaerobic glycolysis
fast oxidative (FO)
intermediate muscle fiber that is
between slow oxidative and fast glycolytic fibers
fibrosis
replacement of muscle fibers by scar tissue
glycolysis
anaerobic breakdown of glucose to ATP
graded muscle response
modification of contraction
strength
hyperplasia
process in which one cell splits to
produce new cells
hypertonia
abnormally high muscle tone
hypertrophy
addition of structural proteins to muscle
fibers
hypotonia
abnormally low muscle tone caused by the
absence of low-level contractions
intercalated disc
part of the sarcolemma that
connects cardiac tissue, and contains gap junctions
and desmosomes
isometric contraction
muscle contraction that occurs
with no change in muscle length
isotonic contraction
muscle contraction that involves
changes in muscle length
lactic acid
product of anaerobic glycolysis
latch-bridges
subset of a cross-bridge in which actin
and myosin remain locked together
latent period
the time when a twitch does not
produce contraction
motor end-plate
sarcolemma of muscle fiber at the
neuromuscular junction, with receptors for the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine
motor unit
motor neuron and the group of muscle
fibers it innervates
muscle tension
force generated by the contraction of
the muscle; tension generated during isotonic
contractions and isometric contractions
muscle tone
low levels of muscle contraction that
occur when a muscle is not producing movement
myoblast
muscle-forming stem cell
myofibril
long, cylindrical organelle that runs parallel
within the muscle fiber and contains the sarcomeres
myogram
instrument used to measure twitch tension
myosin
protein that makes up most of the thick
cylindrical myofilament within a sarcomere muscle
fiber
myotube
fusion of many myoblast cells
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
synapse between the
axon terminal of a motor neuron and the section of
388
10 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
the membrane of a muscle fiber with receptors for
the acetylcholine released by the terminal
neurotransmitter
signaling chemical released by
nerve terminals that bind to and activate receptors
on target cells
oxygen debt
amount of oxygen needed to
compensate for ATP produced without oxygen
during muscle contraction
pacesetter cell
cell that triggers action potentials in
smooth muscle
pericyte
stem cell that regenerates smooth muscle
cells
perimysium
connective tissue that bundles skeletal
muscle fibers into fascicles within a skeletal muscle
power stroke
action of myosin pulling actin inward
(toward the M line)
pyruvic acid
product of glycolysis that can be used in
aerobic respiration or converted to lactic acid
recruitment
increase in the number of motor units
involved in contraction
relaxation phase
period after twitch contraction
when tension decreases
sarcolemma
plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle
fiber
sarcomere
longitudinally, repeating functional unit of
skeletal muscle, with all of the contractile and
associated proteins involved in contraction
sarcopenia
age-related muscle atrophy
sarcoplasm
cytoplasm of a muscle cell
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
specialized smooth
endoplasmic reticulum, which stores, releases, and
retrieves Ca++
satellite cell
stem cell that helps to repair muscle
cells
skeletal muscle
striated, multinucleated muscle that
requires signaling from the nervous system to
trigger contraction; most skeletal muscles are
referred to as voluntary muscles that move bones
and produce movement
slow oxidative (SO)
muscle fiber that primarily uses
aerobic respiration
smooth muscle
nonstriated, mononucleated muscle
in the skin that is associated with hair follicles;
assists in moving materials in the walls of internal
organs, blood vessels, and internal passageways
somites
blocks of paraxial mesoderm cells
stress-relaxation response
relaxation of smooth
muscle tissue after being stretched
synaptic cleft
space between a nerve (axon) terminal
and a motor end-plate
T-tubule
projection of the sarcolemma into the
interior of the cell
tetanus
a continuous fused contraction
thick filament
the thick myosin strands and their
multiple heads projecting from the center of the
sarcomere toward, but not all to way to, the Z-discs
thin filament
thin strands of actin and its troponin-
tropomyosin complex projecting from the Z-discs
toward the center of the sarcomere
treppe
stepwise increase in contraction tension
triad
the grouping of one T-tubule and two terminal
cisternae
tropomyosin
regulatory protein that covers myosin-
binding sites to prevent actin from binding to myosin
troponin
regulatory protein that binds to actin,
tropomyosin, and calcium
twitch
single contraction produced by one action
potential
varicosity
enlargement of neurons that release
neurotransmitters into synaptic clefts
visceral muscle
smooth muscle found in the walls of
visceral organs
voltage-gated sodium channels
membrane proteins
that open sodium channels in response to a
sufficient voltage change, and initiate and transmit
the action potential as Na+ enters through the
channel
wave summation
addition of successive neural
stimuli to produce greater contraction
Chapter Review
10.1 Overview of Muscle Tissues
Muscle is the tissue in animals that allows for active
movement of the body or materials within the body.
There are three types of muscle tissue: skeletal
muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle. Most of
the body’s skeletal muscle produces movement by
acting on the skeleton. Cardiac muscle is found in the
wall of the heart and pumps blood through the
circulatory system.
Smooth muscle is found in the skin, where it is
associated with hair follicles; it also is found in the
walls of internal organs, blood vessels, and internal
passageways, where it assists in moving materials.
10.2 Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscles contain connective tissue, blood
vessels, and nerves. There are three layers of
connective tissue: epimysium, perimysium, and
endomysium. Skeletal muscle fibers are organized into
groups called fascicles. Blood vessels and nerves enter
the connective tissue and branch in the cell. Muscles
10 • Chapter Review
389
attach to bones directly or through tendons or
aponeuroses. Skeletal muscles maintain posture,
stabilize bones and joints, control internal movement,
and generate heat.
Skeletal muscle fibers are long, multinucleated cells.
The membrane of the cell is the sarcolemma; the
cytoplasm of the cell is the sarcoplasm. The
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is a form of endoplasmic
reticulum. Muscle fibers are composed of myofibrils.
The striations are created by the organization of actin
and myosin resulting in the banding pattern of
myofibrils.
10.3 Muscle Fiber Contraction and
Relaxation
A sarcomere is the smallest contractile portion of a
muscle. Myofibrils are composed of thick and thin
filaments. Thick filaments are composed of the protein
myosin; thin filaments are composed of the protein
actin. Troponin and tropomyosin are regulatory
proteins.
Muscle contraction is described by the sliding filament
model of contraction. ACh is the neurotransmitter that
binds at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) to trigger
depolarization, and an action potential travels along
the sarcolemma to trigger calcium release from SR.
The actin sites are exposed after Ca++ enters the
sarcoplasm from its SR storage to activate the
troponin-tropomyosin complex so that the tropomyosin
shifts away from the sites. The cross-bridging of
myosin heads docking into actin-binding sites is
followed by the “power stroke”—the sliding of the thin
filaments by thick filaments. The power strokes are
powered by ATP. Ultimately, the sarcomeres,
myofibrils, and muscle fibers shorten to produce
movement.
10.4 Nervous System Control of Muscle
Tension
The number of cross-bridges formed between actin
and myosin determines the amount of tension
produced by a muscle. The length of a sarcomere is
optimal when the zone of overlap between thin and
thick filaments is greatest. Muscles that are stretched
or compressed too greatly do not produce maximal
amounts of power. A motor unit is formed by a motor
neuron and all of the muscle fibers that are innervated
by that same motor neuron. A single contraction is
called a twitch. A muscle twitch has a latent period, a
contraction phase, and a relaxation phase. A graded
muscle response allows variation in muscle tension.
Summation occurs as successive stimuli are added
together to produce a stronger muscle contraction.
Tetanus is the fusion of contractions to produce a
continuous contraction. Increasing the number of
motor neurons involved increases the amount of motor
units activated in a muscle, which is called recruitment.
Muscle tone is the constant low-level contractions that
allow for posture and stability.
10.5 Types of Muscle Fibers
ATP provides the energy for muscle contraction. The
three mechanisms for ATP regeneration are creatine
phosphate, anaerobic glycolysis, and aerobic
metabolism. Creatine phosphate provides about the
first 15 seconds of ATP at the beginning of muscle
contraction. Anaerobic glycolysis produces small
amounts of ATP in the absence of oxygen for a short
period. Aerobic metabolism utilizes oxygen to produce
much more ATP, allowing a muscle to work for longer
periods. Muscle fatigue, which has many contributing
factors, occurs when muscle can no longer contract. An
oxygen debt is created as a result of muscle use. The
three types of muscle fiber are slow oxidative (SO), fast
oxidative (FO) and fast glycolytic (FG). SO fibers use
aerobic metabolism to produce low power contractions
over long periods and are slow to fatigue. FO fibers use
aerobic metabolism to produce ATP but produce higher
tension contractions than SO fibers. FG fibers use
anaerobic metabolism to produce powerful, high-
tension contractions but fatigue quickly.
10.6 Exercise and Muscle Performance
Hypertrophy is an increase in muscle mass due to the
addition of structural proteins. The opposite of
hypertrophy is atrophy, the loss of muscle mass due to
the breakdown of structural proteins. Endurance
exercise causes an increase in cellular mitochondria,
myoglobin, and capillary networks in SO fibers.
Endurance athletes have a high level of SO fibers
relative to the other fiber types. Resistance exercise
causes hypertrophy. Power-producing muscles have a
higher number of FG fibers than of slow fibers.
Strenuous exercise causes muscle cell damage that
requires time to heal. Some athletes use performance-
enhancing substances to enhance muscle
performance. Muscle atrophy due to age is called
sarcopenia and occurs as muscle fibers die and are
replaced by connective and adipose tissue.
10.7 Cardiac Muscle Tissue
Cardiac muscle is striated muscle that is present only
in the heart. Cardiac muscle fibers have a single
nucleus, are branched, and joined to one another by
intercalated discs that contain gap junctions for
390
10 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
depolarization between cells and desmosomes to hold
the fibers together when the heart contracts.
Contraction in each cardiac muscle fiber is triggered by
Ca++ ions in a similar manner as skeletal muscle, but
here the Ca++ ions come from SR and through voltage-
gated calcium channels in the sarcolemma. Pacemaker
cells stimulate the spontaneous contraction of cardiac
muscle as a functional unit, called a syncytium.
10.8 Smooth Muscle
Smooth muscle is found throughout the body around
various organs and tracts. Smooth muscle cells have a
single nucleus, and are spindle-shaped. Smooth
muscle cells can undergo hyperplasia, mitotically
dividing to produce new cells. The smooth cells are
nonstriated, but their sarcoplasm is filled with actin
and myosin, along with dense bodies in the
sarcolemma to anchor the thin filaments and a network
of intermediate filaments involved in pulling the
sarcolemma toward the fiber’s middle, shortening it in
the process. Ca++ ions trigger contraction when they
are released from SR and enter through opened
voltage-gated calcium channels. Smooth muscle
contraction is initiated when the Ca++ binds to
intracellular calmodulin, which then activates an
enzyme called myosin kinase that phosphorylates
myosin heads so they can form the cross-bridges with
actin and then pull on the thin filaments. Smooth
muscle can be stimulated by pacesetter cells, by the
autonomic nervous system, by hormones,
spontaneously, or by stretching. The fibers in some
smooth muscle have latch-bridges, cross-bridges that
cycle slowly without the need for ATP; these muscles
can maintain low-level contractions for long periods.
Single-unit smooth muscle tissue contains gap
junctions to synchronize membrane depolarization and
contractions so that the muscle contracts as a single
unit. Single-unit smooth muscle in the walls of the
viscera, called visceral muscle, has a stress-relaxation
response that permits muscle to stretch, contract, and
relax as the organ expands. Multiunit smooth muscle
cells do not possess gap junctions, and contraction
does not spread from one cell to the next.
10.9 Development and Regeneration of
Muscle Tissue
Muscle tissue arises from embryonic mesoderm.
Somites give rise to myoblasts and fuse to form a
myotube. The nucleus of each contributing myoblast
remains intact in the mature skeletal muscle cell,
resulting in a mature, multinucleate cell. Satellite cells
help to repair skeletal muscle cells. Smooth muscle
tissue can regenerate from stem cells called pericytes,
whereas dead cardiac muscle tissue is replaced by scar
tissue. Aging causes muscle mass to decrease and be
replaced by noncontractile connective tissue and
adipose tissue.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
micromacro) to learn more about macro- and
microstructures of skeletal muscles. (a) What are
the names of the “junction points” between
sarcomeres? (b) What are the names of the
“subunits” within the myofibrils that run the length
of skeletal muscle fibers? (c) What is the “double
strand of pearls” described in the video? (d) What
gives a skeletal muscle fiber its striated
appearance?
2. Every skeletal muscle fiber is supplied by a motor
neuron at the NMJ. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/skelmuscfiber) to learn more
about what happens at the neuromuscular junction.
(a) What is the definition of a motor unit? (b) What is
the structural and functional difference between a
large motor unit and a small motor unit? Can you
give an example of each? (c) Why is the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine degraded after
binding to its receptor?
3. The release of calcium ions initiates muscle
contractions. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/
l/calciumrole) to learn more about the role of
calcium. (a) What are “T-tubules” and what is their
role? (b) Please also describe how actin-binding
sites are made available for cross-bridging with
myosin heads during contraction.
10 • Interactive Link Questions
391
Review Questions
4. Muscle that has a striped appearance is described
as being ________.
a.
elastic
b.
nonstriated
c.
excitable
d.
striated
5. Which element is important in directly triggering
contraction?
a.
sodium (Na+)
b.
calcium (Ca++)
c.
potassium (K+)
d.
chloride (Cl-)
6. Which of the following properties is not common to
all three muscle tissues?
a.
excitability
b.
the need for ATP
c.
at rest, uses shielding proteins to cover actin-
binding sites
d.
elasticity
7. The correct order for the smallest to the largest unit
of organization in muscle tissue is ________.
a.
fascicle, filament, muscle fiber, myofibril
b.
filament, myofibril, muscle fiber, fascicle
c.
muscle fiber, fascicle, filament, myofibril
d.
myofibril, muscle fiber, filament, fascicle
8. Depolarization of the sarcolemma means
________.
a.
the inside of the membrane has become less
negative as sodium ions accumulate
b.
the outside of the membrane has become less
negative as sodium ions accumulate
c.
the inside of the membrane has become more
negative as sodium ions accumulate
d.
the sarcolemma has completely lost any
electrical charge
9. In relaxed muscle, the myosin-binding site on actin
is blocked by ________.
a.
titin
b.
troponin
c.
myoglobin
d.
tropomyosin
10. According to the sliding filament model, binding
sites on actin open when ________.
a.
creatine phosphate levels rise
b.
ATP levels rise
c.
acetylcholine levels rise
d.
calcium ion levels rise
11. The cell membrane of a muscle fiber is called
________.
a.
myofibril
b.
sarcolemma
c.
sarcoplasm
d.
myofilament
12. Muscle relaxation occurs when ________.
a.
calcium ions are actively transported out of
the sarcoplasmic reticulum
b.
calcium ions diffuse out of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum
c.
calcium ions are actively transported into the
sarcoplasmic reticulum
d.
calcium ions diffuse into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum
13. During muscle contraction, the cross-bridge
detaches when ________.
a.
the myosin head binds to an ADP molecule
b.
the myosin head binds to an ATP molecule
c.
calcium ions bind to troponin
d.
calcium ions bind to actin
14. Thin and thick filaments are organized into
functional units called ________.
a.
myofibrils
b.
myofilaments
c.
T-tubules
d.
sarcomeres
15. During which phase of a twitch in a muscle fiber is
tension the greatest?
a.
resting phase
b.
repolarization phase
c.
contraction phase
d.
relaxation phase
16. Muscle fatigue is caused by ________.
a.
buildup of ATP and lactic acid levels
b.
exhaustion of energy reserves and buildup of
lactic acid levels
c.
buildup of ATP and pyruvic acid levels
d.
exhaustion of energy reserves and buildup of
pyruvic acid levels
392
10 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
17. A sprinter would experience muscle fatigue
sooner than a marathon runner due to ________.
a.
anaerobic metabolism in the muscles of the
sprinter
b.
anaerobic metabolism in the muscles of the
marathon runner
c.
aerobic metabolism in the muscles of the
sprinter
d.
glycolysis in the muscles of the marathon
runner
18. What aspect of creatine phosphate allows it to
supply energy to muscles?
a.
ATPase activity
b.
phosphate bonds
c.
carbon bonds
d.
hydrogen bonds
19. Drug X blocks ATP regeneration from ADP and
phosphate. How will muscle cells respond to this
drug?
a.
by absorbing ATP from the bloodstream
b.
by using ADP as an energy source
c.
by using glycogen as an energy source
d.
none of the above
20. The muscles of a professional sprinter are most
likely to have ________.
a.
80 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 20
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
b.
20 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 80
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
c.
50 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 50
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
d.
40 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 60
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
21. The muscles of a professional marathon runner
are most likely to have ________.
a.
80 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 20
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
b.
20 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 80
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
c.
50 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 50
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
d.
40 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 60
percent slow-twitch muscle fibers
22. Which of the following statements is true?
a.
Fast fibers have a small diameter.
b.
Fast fibers contain loosely packed myofibrils.
c.
Fast fibers have large glycogen reserves.
d.
Fast fibers have many mitochondria.
23. Which of the following statements is false?
a.
Slow fibers have a small network of
capillaries.
b.
Slow fibers contain the pigment myoglobin.
c.
Slow fibers contain a large number of
mitochondria.
d.
Slow fibers contract for extended periods.
24. Cardiac muscles differ from skeletal muscles in
that they ________.
a.
are striated
b.
utilize aerobic metabolism
c.
contain myofibrils
d.
contain intercalated discs
25. If cardiac muscle cells were prevented from
undergoing aerobic metabolism, they ultimately
would ________.
a.
undergo glycolysis
b.
synthesize ATP
c.
stop contracting
d.
start contracting
26. Smooth muscles differ from skeletal and cardiac
muscles in that they ________.
a.
lack myofibrils
b.
are under voluntary control
c.
lack myosin
d.
lack actin
27. Which of the following statements describes
smooth muscle cells?
a.
They are resistant to fatigue.
b.
They have a rapid onset of contractions.
c.
They cannot exhibit tetanus.
d.
They primarily use anaerobic metabolism.
28. From which embryonic cell type does muscle
tissue develop?
a.
ganglion cells
b.
myotube cells
c.
myoblast cells
d.
satellite cells
29. Which cell type helps to repair injured muscle
fibers?
a.
ganglion cells
b.
myotube cells
c.
myoblast cells
d.
satellite cells
10 • Review Questions
393
Critical Thinking Questions
30. Why is elasticity an important quality of muscle
tissue?
31. What would happen to skeletal muscle if the
epimysium were destroyed?
32. Describe how tendons facilitate body movement.
33. What are the five primary functions of skeletal
muscle?
34. What are the opposite roles of voltage-gated
sodium channels and voltage-gated potassium
channels?
35. How would muscle contractions be affected if
skeletal muscle fibers did not have T-tubules?
36. What causes the striated appearance of skeletal
muscle tissue?
37. How would muscle contractions be affected if ATP
was completely depleted in a muscle fiber?
38. Why does a motor unit of the eye have few muscle
fibers compared to a motor unit of the leg?
39. What factors contribute to the amount of tension
produced in an individual muscle fiber?
40. Why do muscle cells use creatine phosphate
instead of glycolysis to supply ATP for the first few
seconds of muscle contraction?
41. Is aerobic respiration more or less efficient than
glycolysis? Explain your answer.
42. What changes occur at the cellular level in
response to endurance training?
43. What changes occur at the cellular level in
response to resistance training?
44. What would be the drawback of cardiac
contractions being the same duration as skeletal
muscle contractions?
45. How are cardiac muscle cells similar to and
different from skeletal muscle cells?
46. Why can smooth muscles contract over a wider
range of resting lengths than skeletal and cardiac
muscle?
47. Describe the differences between single-unit
smooth muscle and multiunit smooth muscle.
48. Why is muscle that has sustained significant
damage unable to produce the same amount of
power as it could before being damaged?
49. Which muscle type(s) (skeletal, smooth, or
cardiac) can regenerate new muscle cells/fibers?
Explain your answer.
394
10 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 11
The Muscular System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the actions and roles of agonists and antagonists
•
Explain the structure and organization of muscle fascicles and their role in generating force
•
Explain the criteria used to name skeletal muscles
•
Identify the skeletal muscles and their actions on the skeleton and soft tissues of the body
•
Identify the origins and insertions of skeletal muscles and the prime movements
Think about the things that you do each day—talking, walking, sitting, standing, and running—all of
these activities require movement of particular skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles are even used during sleep. The
diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscle that has to contract and relax for you to breathe day and night. If you recall
from your study of the skeletal system and joints, body movement occurs around the joints in the body. The focus of
this chapter is on skeletal muscle organization. The system to name skeletal muscles will be explained; in some
cases, the muscle is named by its shape, and in other cases it is named by its location or attachments to the
skeleton. If you understand the meaning of the name of the muscle, often it will help you remember its location and/
or what it does. This chapter also will describe how skeletal muscles are arranged to accomplish movement, and
how other muscles may assist, or be arranged on the skeleton to resist or carry out the opposite movement. The
actions of the skeletal muscles will be covered in a regional manner, working from the head down to the toes.
11.1 Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their
Lever Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast agonist and antagonist muscles
•
Describe how fascicles are arranged within a skeletal muscle
•
Explain the major events of a skeletal muscle contraction within a muscle in generating force
Figure 11.1
A Body in Motion The muscular system allows us to move, flex and contort our bodies. Practicing yoga, as pictured here, is a
good example of the voluntary use of the muscular system. (credit: Dmitry Yanchylenko)
To move the skeleton, the tension created by the contraction of the fibers in most skeletal muscles is transferred to
the tendons. The tendons are strong bands of dense, regular connective tissue that connect muscles to bones. The
bone connection is why this muscle tissue is called skeletal muscle.
Interactions of Skeletal Muscles in the Body
To pull on a bone, that is, to change the angle at its synovial joint, which essentially moves the skeleton, a skeletal
muscle must also be attached to a fixed part of the skeleton. The moveable end of the muscle that attaches to the
bone being pulled is called the muscle’s insertion, and the end of the muscle attached to a fixed (stabilized) bone is
called the origin. During forearm flexion—bending the elbow—the brachioradialis assists the brachialis.
Although a number of muscles may be involved in an action, the principal muscle involved is called the prime
mover, or agonist. To lift a cup, a muscle called the biceps brachii is actually the prime mover; however, because it
can be assisted by the brachialis, the brachialis is called a synergist in this action (Figure 11.2). A synergist can also
be a fixator that stabilizes the bone that is the attachment for the prime mover’s origin.
FIGURE 11.2
Prime Movers and Synergists
The biceps brachii flex the lower arm. The brachoradialis, in the forearm, and brachialis,
located deep to the biceps in the upper arm, are both synergists that aid in this motion.
A muscle with the opposite action of the prime mover is called an antagonist. Antagonists play two important roles
in muscle function: (1) they maintain body or limb position, such as holding the arm out or standing erect; and (2)
they control rapid movement, as in shadow boxing without landing a punch or the ability to check the motion of a
limb.
For example, to extend the knee, a group of four muscles called the quadriceps femoris in the anterior compartment
of the thigh are activated (and would be called the agonists of knee extension). However, to flex the knee joint, an
opposite or antagonistic set of muscles called the hamstrings is activated.
As you can see, these terms would also be reversed for the opposing action. If you consider the first action as the
knee bending, the hamstrings would be called the agonists and the quadriceps femoris would then be called the
antagonists. See Table 11.1 for a list of some agonists and antagonists.
396
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Agonist and Antagonist Skeletal Muscle Pairs
Agonist
Antagonist
Movement
Biceps brachii: in the anterior
compartment of the arm
Triceps brachii: in the
posterior
compartment of the
arm
The biceps brachii flexes the forearm, whereas the
triceps brachii extends it.
Hamstrings: group of three
muscles in the posterior
compartment of the thigh
Quadriceps femoris:
group of four muscles
in the anterior
compartment of the
thigh
The hamstrings flex the leg, whereas the quadriceps
femoris extend it.
Flexor digitorum superficialis
and flexor digitorum
profundus: in the anterior
compartment of the forearm
Extensor digitorum: in
the posterior
compartment of the
forearm
The flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum
profundus flex the fingers and the hand at the wrist,
whereas the extensor digitorum extends the fingers
and the hand at the wrist.
TABLE 11.1
There are also skeletal muscles that do not pull against the skeleton for movements. For example, there are the
muscles that produce facial expressions. The insertions and origins of facial muscles are in the skin, so that certain
individual muscles contract to form a smile or frown, form sounds or words, and raise the eyebrows. There also are
skeletal muscles in the tongue, and the external urinary and anal sphincters that allow for voluntary regulation of
urination and defecation, respectively. In addition, the diaphragm contracts and relaxes to change the volume of the
pleural cavities but it does not move the skeleton to do this.
Patterns of Fascicle Organization
Skeletal muscle is enclosed in connective tissue scaffolding at three levels. Each muscle fiber (cell) is covered by
endomysium and the entire muscle is covered by epimysium. When a group of muscle fibers is “bundled” as a unit
within the whole muscle by an additional covering of a connective tissue called perimysium, that bundled group of
muscle fibers is called a fascicle. Fascicle arrangement by perimysia is correlated to the force generated by a
muscle; it also affects the range of motion of the muscle. Based on the patterns of fascicle arrangement, skeletal
muscles can be classified in several ways. What follows are the most common fascicle arrangements.
Everyday Connection
Exercise and Stretching
When exercising, it is important to first warm up the muscles. Stretching pulls on the muscle fibers and it also
results in an increased blood flow to the muscles being worked. Without a proper warm-up, it is possible that
you may either damage some of the muscle fibers or pull a tendon. A pulled tendon, regardless of location,
results in pain, swelling, and diminished function; if it is moderate to severe, the injury could immobilize you for
an extended period.
Recall the discussion about muscles crossing joints to create movement. Most of the joints you use during
exercise are synovial joints, which have synovial fluid in the joint space between two bones. Exercise and
stretching may also have a beneficial effect on synovial joints. Synovial fluid is a thin, but viscous film with the
consistency of egg whites. When you first get up and start moving, your joints feel stiff for a number of reasons.
After proper stretching and warm-up, the synovial fluid may become less viscous, allowing for better joint
function.
11.1 • Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their Lever Systems
397
Parallel muscles have fascicles that are arranged in the same direction as the long axis of the muscle (Figure 11.3).
The majority of skeletal muscles in the body have this type of organization. Some parallel muscles are flat sheets
that expand at the ends to make broad attachments. Other parallel muscles are rotund with tendons at one or both
ends. Muscles that seem to be plump have a large mass of tissue located in the middle of the muscle, between the
insertion and the origin, which is known as the central body. A more common name for this muscle is belly. When a
muscle contracts, the contractile fibers shorten it to an even larger bulge. For example, extend and then flex your
biceps brachii muscle; the large, middle section is the belly (Figure 11.4). When a parallel muscle has a central,
large belly that is spindle-shaped, meaning it tapers as it extends to its origin and insertion, it sometimes is called
fusiform.
FIGURE 11.3
Muscle Shapes and Fiber Alignment
The skeletal muscles of the body typically come in seven different general shapes.
398
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.4
Biceps Brachii Muscle Contraction
The large mass at the center of a muscle is called the belly. Tendons emerge from
both ends of the belly and connect the muscle to the bones, allowing the skeleton to move. The tendons of the bicep connect to the upper
arm and the forearm. (credit: Victoria Garcia)
Circular muscles are also called sphincters (see Figure 11.3). When they relax, the sphincters’ concentrically
arranged bundles of muscle fibers increase the size of the opening, and when they contract, the size of the opening
shrinks to the point of closure. The orbicularis oris muscle is a circular muscle that goes around the mouth. When it
contracts, the oral opening becomes smaller, as when puckering the lips for whistling. Another example is the
orbicularis oculi, one of which surrounds each eye. Consider, for example, the names of the two orbicularis muscles
(orbicularis oris and oribicularis oculi), where part of the first name of both muscles is the same. The first part of
orbicularis, orb (orb = “circular”), is a reference to a round or circular structure; it may also make one think of orbit,
such as the moon’s path around the earth. The word oris (oris = “oral”) refers to the oral cavity, or the mouth. The
word oculi (ocular = “eye”) refers to the eye.
There are other muscles throughout the body named by their shape or location. The deltoid is a large, triangular-
shaped muscle that covers the shoulder. It is so-named because the Greek letter delta looks like a triangle. The
rectus abdominis (rector = “straight”) is the straight muscle in the anterior wall of the abdomen, while the rectus
femoris is the straight muscle in the anterior compartment of the thigh.
When a muscle has a widespread expansion over a sizable area, but then the fascicles come to a single, common
attachment point, the muscle is called convergent. The attachment point for a convergent muscle could be a
tendon, an aponeurosis (a flat, broad tendon), or a raphe (a very slender tendon). The large muscle on the chest, the
pectoralis major, is an example of a convergent muscle because it converges on the greater tubercle of the humerus
via a tendon. The temporalis muscle of the cranium is another.
Pennate muscles (penna = “feathers”) blend into a tendon that runs through the central region of the muscle for its
whole length, somewhat like the quill of a feather with the muscle arranged similar to the feathers. Due to this
design, the muscle fibers in a pennate muscle can only pull at an angle, and as a result, contracting pennate muscles
do not move their tendons very far. However, because a pennate muscle generally can hold more muscle fibers
within it, it can produce relatively more tension for its size. There are three subtypes of pennate muscles.
In a unipennate muscle, the fascicles are located on one side of the tendon. The extensor digitorum of the forearm
is an example of a unipennate muscle. A bipennate muscle has fascicles on both sides of the tendon. In some
pennate muscles, the muscle fibers wrap around the tendon, sometimes forming individual fascicles in the process.
This arrangement is referred to as multipennate. A common example is the deltoid muscle of the shoulder, which
covers the shoulder but has a single tendon that inserts on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.
11.1 • Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their Lever Systems
399
Because of fascicles, a portion of a multipennate muscle like the deltoid can be stimulated by the nervous system to
change the direction of the pull. For example, when the deltoid muscle contracts, the arm abducts (moves away
from midline in the sagittal plane), but when only the anterior fascicle is stimulated, the arm will abduct and flex
(move anteriorly at the shoulder joint).
The Lever System of Muscle and Bone Interactions
Skeletal muscles do not work by themselves. Muscles are arranged in pairs based on their functions. For muscles
attached to the bones of the skeleton, the connection determines the force, speed, and range of movement. These
characteristics depend on each other and can explain the general organization of the muscular and skeletal
systems.
The skeleton and muscles act together to move the body. Have you ever used the back of a hammer to remove a nail
from wood? The handle acts as a lever and the head of the hammer acts as a fulcrum, the fixed point that the force
is applied to when you pull back or push down on the handle. The effort applied to this system is the pulling or
pushing on the handle to remove the nail, which is the load, or “resistance” to the movement of the handle in the
system. Our musculoskeletal system works in a similar manner, with bones being stiff levers and the articular
endings of the bones—encased in synovial joints—acting as fulcrums. The load would be an object being lifted or any
resistance to a movement (your head is a load when you are lifting it), and the effort, or applied force, comes from
contracting skeletal muscle.
11.2 Naming Skeletal Muscles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the criteria used to name skeletal muscles
•
Explain how understanding the muscle names helps describe shapes, location, and actions of various muscles
The Greeks and Romans conducted the first studies done on the human body in Western culture. The educated
class of subsequent societies studied Latin and Greek, and therefore the early pioneers of anatomy continued to
apply Latin and Greek terminology or roots when they named the skeletal muscles. The large number of muscles in
the body and unfamiliar words can make learning the names of the muscles in the body seem daunting, but
understanding the etymology can help. Etymology is the study of how the root of a particular word entered a
language and how the use of the word evolved over time. Taking the time to learn the root of the words is crucial to
understanding the vocabulary of anatomy and physiology. When you understand the names of muscles it will help
you remember where the muscles are located and what they do (Figure 11.5, Figure 11.6, and Table 11.2).
Pronunciation of words and terms will take a bit of time to master, but after you have some basic information; the
correct names and pronunciations will become easier.
400
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.5
Overview of the Muscular System
On the anterior and posterior views of the muscular system above, superficial
muscles (those at the surface) are shown on the right side of the body while deep muscles (those underneath the superficial muscles) are
shown on the left half of the body. For the legs, superficial muscles are shown in the anterior view while the posterior view shows both
11.2 • Naming Skeletal Muscles
401
superficial and deep muscles.
FIGURE 11.6
Understanding a Muscle Name from the Latin
Mnemonic Device for Latin Roots
Example
Latin or Greek Translation
Mnemonic Device
ad
to; toward
ADvance toward your goal
ab
away from
n/a
sub
under
SUBmarines move under water.
ductor
something that moves
A conDUCTOR makes a train move.
anti
against
If you are antisocial, you are against engaging in social activities.
epi
on top of
n/a
apo
to the side of
n/a
longissimus
longest
“Longissimus” is longer than the word “long.”
longus
long
long
brevis
short
brief
maximus
large
max
medius
medium
“Medius” and “medium” both begin with “med.”
minimus
tiny; little
mini
rectus
straight
To RECTify a situation is to straighten it out.
multi
many
If something is MULTIcolored, it has many colors.
uni
one
A UNIcorn has one horn.
TABLE 11.2
402
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Example
Latin or Greek Translation
Mnemonic Device
bi/di
two
If a ring is DIcast, it is made of two metals.
tri
three
TRIple the amount of money is three times as much.
quad
four
QUADruplets are four children born at one birth.
externus
outside
EXternal
internus
inside
INternal
TABLE 11.2
Anatomists name the skeletal muscles according to a number of criteria, each of which describes the muscle in
some way. These include naming the muscle after its shape, its size compared to other muscles in the area, its
location in the body or the location of its attachments to the skeleton, how many origins it has, or its action.
The skeletal muscle’s anatomical location or its relationship to a particular bone often determines its name. For
example, the frontalis muscle is located on top of the frontal bone of the skull. Similarly, the shapes of some
muscles are very distinctive and the names, such as orbicularis, reflect the shape. For the buttocks, the size of the
muscles influences the names: gluteus maximus (largest), gluteus medius (medium), and the gluteus minimus
(smallest). Names were given to indicate length—brevis (short), longus (long)—and to identify position relative to
the midline: lateralis (to the outside away from the midline), and medialis (toward the midline). The direction of the
muscle fibers and fascicles are used to describe muscles relative to the midline, such as the rectus (straight)
abdominis, or the oblique (at an angle) muscles of the abdomen.
Some muscle names indicate the number of muscles in a group. One example of this is the quadriceps, a group of
four muscles located on the anterior (front) thigh. Other muscle names can provide information as to how many
origins a particular muscle has, such as the biceps brachii. The prefix bi indicates that the muscle has two origins
and tri indicates three origins.
The location of a muscle’s attachment can also appear in its name. When the name of a muscle is based on the
attachments, the origin is always named first. For instance, the sternocleidomastoid muscle of the neck has a dual
origin on the sternum (sterno) and clavicle (cleido), and it inserts on the mastoid process of the temporal bone. The
last feature by which to name a muscle is its action. When muscles are named for the movement they produce, one
can find action words in their name. Some examples are flexor (decreases the angle at the joint), extensor
(increases the angle at the joint), abductor (moves the bone away from the midline), or adductor (moves the bone
toward the midline).
11.3 Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the axial muscles of the face, head, and neck
•
Identify the movement and function of the face, head, and neck muscles
The skeletal muscles are divided into axial (muscles of the trunk and head) and appendicular (muscles of the arms
and legs) categories. This system reflects the bones of the skeleton system, which are also arranged in this manner.
The axial muscles are grouped based on location, function, or both. Some of the axial muscles may seem to blur the
boundaries because they cross over to the appendicular skeleton. The first grouping of the axial muscles you will
review includes the muscles of the head and neck, then you will review the muscles of the vertebral column, and
finally you will review the oblique and rectus muscles.
Muscles That Create Facial Expression
The origins of the muscles of facial expression are on the surface of the skull (remember, the origin of a muscle does
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
403
not move). The insertions of these muscles have fibers intertwined with connective tissue and the dermis of the
skin. Because the muscles insert in the skin rather than on bone, when they contract, the skin moves to create facial
expression (Figure 11.7).
FIGURE 11.7
Muscles of Facial Expression
Many of the muscles of facial expression insert into the skin surrounding the eyelids, nose
and mouth, producing facial expressions by moving the skin rather than bones.
The orbicularis oris is a circular muscle that moves the lips, and the orbicularis oculi is a circular muscle that
closes the eye. The occipitofrontalis muscle moves up the scalp and eyebrows. The muscle has a frontal belly and
an occipital (near the occipital bone on the posterior part of the skull) belly. In other words, there is a muscle on the
forehead (frontalis) and one on the back of the head (occipitalis), but there is no muscle across the top of the head.
Instead, the two bellies are connected by a broad tendon called the epicranial aponeurosis, or galea aponeurosis
(galea = “helmet”). The physicians originally studying human anatomy thought the skull looked like a helmet.
A large portion of the face is composed of the buccinator muscle, which compresses the cheek. This muscle allows
you to whistle, blow, and suck; and it contributes to the action of chewing. There are several small facial muscles,
one of which is the corrugator supercilii, which is the prime mover of the eyebrows. Place your finger on your
eyebrows at the point of the bridge of the nose. Raise your eyebrows as if you were surprised and lower your
eyebrows as if you were frowning. With these movements, you can feel the action of the corrugator supercilii.
Additional muscles of facial expression are presented in Figure 11.8.
404
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.8
Muscles in Facial Expression
Muscles That Move the Eyes
The movement of the eyeball is under the control of the extrinsic eye muscles, which originate outside the eye and
insert onto the outer surface of the white of the eye. These muscles are located inside the eye socket and cannot be
seen on any part of the visible eyeball (Figure 11.9 and Table 11.3). If you have ever been to a doctor who held up a
finger and asked you to follow it up, down, and to both sides, the doctor is checking to make sure your eye muscles
are acting in a coordinated pattern.
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
405
FIGURE 11.9
Muscles of the Eyes
(a) The extrinsic eye muscles originate outside of the eye on the skull. (b) Each muscle inserts onto
the eyeball.
Muscles of the Eyes
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Moves eyes up and
toward nose; rotates
eyes from 1 o’clock to 3
o’clock
Eyeballs
Superior
(elevates);
medial
(adducts)
Superior
rectus
Common
tendinous ring
(ring attaches to
optic foramen)
Superior surface
of eyeball
Moves eyes down and
toward nose; rotates
eyes from 6 o’clock to 3
o’clock
Eyeballs
Inferior
(depresses);
medial
(adducts)
Inferior
rectus
Common
tendinous ring
(ring attaches to
optic foramen)
Inferior surface of
eyeball
Moves eyes away from
nose
Eyeballs
Lateral
(abducts)
Lateral
rectus
Common
tendinous ring
(ring attaches to
optic foramen)
Lateral surface of
eyeball
Moves eyes toward nose
Eyeballs
Medial (adducts)
Medial
rectus
Common
tendinous ring
(ring attaches to
optic foramen)
Medial surface of
eyeball
Moves eyes up and away
from nose; rotates
eyeball from 12 o’clock
to 9 o’clock
Eyeballs
Superior
(elevates);
lateral (abducts)
Inferior
oblique
Floor of orbit
(maxilla)
Surface of eyeball
between inferior
rectus and lateral
rectus
TABLE 11.3
406
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Moves eyes down and
away from nose; rotates
eyeball from 6 o’clock to
9 o’clock
Eyeballs
Inferior
(depress);
lateral (abducts)
Superior
oblique
Sphenoid bone
Surface of eyeball
between superior
rectus and lateral
rectus
Opens eyes
Upper
eyelid
Superior
(elevates)
Levator
palpabrae
superioris
Roof of orbit
(sphenoid bone)
Skin of upper
eyelids
Closes eyelids
Eyelid
skin
Compression
along
superior–inferior
axis
Orbicularis
oculi
Medial bones
composing the
orbit
Circumference of
orbit
TABLE 11.3
Muscles That Move the Lower Jaw
In anatomical terminology, chewing is called mastication. Muscles involved in chewing must be able to exert
enough pressure to bite through and then chew food before it is swallowed (Figure 11.10 and Table 11.4). The
masseter muscle is the main muscle used for chewing because it elevates the mandible (lower jaw) to close the
mouth, and it is assisted by the temporalis muscle, which retracts the mandible. You can feel the temporalis move
by putting your fingers to your temple as you chew.
FIGURE 11.10
Muscles That Move the Lower Jaw
The muscles that move the lower jaw are typically located within the cheek and
originate from processes in the skull. This provides the jaw muscles with the large amount of leverage needed for chewing.
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
407
Muscles of the Lower Jaw
Movement
Target
Target motion direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Closes mouth; aids
chewing
Mandible
Superior (elevates)
Masseter
Maxilla arch;
zygomatic
arch (for
masseter)
Mandible
Closes mouth; pulls lower
jaw in under upper jaw
Mandible
Superior (elevates);
posterior (retracts)
Temporalis
Temporal
bone
Mandible
Opens mouth; pushes
lower jaw out under upper
jaw; moves lower jaw side-
to-side
Mandible
Inferior (depresses);
posterior (protracts);
lateral (abducts); medial
(adducts)
Lateral
pterygoid
Pterygoid
process of
sphenoid
bone
Mandible
Closes mouth; pushes
lower jaw out under upper
jaw; moves lower jaw side-
to-side
Mandible
Superior (elevates);
posterior (protracts);
lateral (abducts); medial
(adducts)
Medial
pterygoid
Sphenoid
bone;
maxilla
Mandible;
temporo-
mandibular
joint
TABLE 11.4
Although the masseter and temporalis are responsible for elevating and closing the jaw to break food into digestible
pieces, the medial pterygoid and lateral pterygoid muscles provide assistance in chewing and moving food within
the mouth.
Muscles That Move the Tongue
Although the tongue is obviously important for tasting food, it is also necessary for mastication, deglutition
(swallowing), and speech (Figure 11.11 and Figure 11.12). Because it is so moveable, the tongue facilitates complex
speech patterns and sounds.
FIGURE 11.11
Muscles that Move the Tongue
408
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.12
Muscles for Tongue Movement, Swallowing, and Speech
Tongue muscles can be extrinsic or intrinsic. Extrinsic tongue muscles insert into the tongue from outside origins,
and the intrinsic tongue muscles insert into the tongue from origins within it. The extrinsic muscles move the whole
tongue in different directions, whereas the intrinsic muscles allow the tongue to change its shape (such as, curling
the tongue in a loop or flattening it).
The extrinsic muscles all include the word root glossus (glossus = “tongue”), and the muscle names are derived
from where the muscle originates. The genioglossus (genio = “chin”) originates on the mandible and allows the
tongue to move downward and forward. The styloglossus originates on the styloid bone, and allows upward and
backward motion. The palatoglossus originates on the soft palate to elevate the back of the tongue, and the
hyoglossus originates on the hyoid bone to move the tongue downward and flatten it.
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
409
Muscles of the Anterior Neck
The muscles of the anterior neck assist in deglutition (swallowing) and speech by controlling the positions of the
larynx (voice box), and the hyoid bone, a horseshoe-shaped bone that functions as a solid foundation on which the
tongue can move. The muscles of the neck are categorized according to their position relative to the hyoid bone
(Figure 11.13). Suprahyoid muscles are superior to it, and the infrahyoid muscles are located inferiorly.
FIGURE 11.13
Muscles of the Anterior Neck
The anterior muscles of the neck facilitate swallowing and speech. The suprahyoid
muscles originate from above the hyoid bone in the chin region. The infrahyoid muscles originate below the hyoid bone in the lower neck.
The suprahyoid muscles raise the hyoid bone, the floor of the mouth, and the larynx during deglutition. These
include the digastric muscle, which has anterior and posterior bellies that work to elevate the hyoid bone and larynx
when one swallows; it also depresses the mandible. The stylohyoid muscle moves the hyoid bone posteriorly,
elevating the larynx, and the mylohyoid muscle lifts it and helps press the tongue to the top of the mouth. The
geniohyoid depresses the mandible in addition to raising and pulling the hyoid bone anteriorly.
Everyday Connection
Anesthesia and the Tongue Muscles
Before surgery, a patient must be made ready for general anesthesia. The normal homeostatic controls of the
body are put “on hold” so that the patient can be prepped for surgery. Control of respiration must be switched
from the patient’s homeostatic control to the control of the anesthesiologist. The drugs used for anesthesia relax
a majority of the body’s muscles.
Among the muscles affected during general anesthesia are those that are necessary for breathing and moving
the tongue. Under anesthesia, the tongue can relax and partially or fully block the airway, and the muscles of
respiration may not move the diaphragm or chest wall. To avoid possible complications, the safest procedure to
use on a patient is called endotracheal intubation. Placing a tube into the trachea allows the doctors to maintain
a patient’s (open) airway to the lungs and seal the airway off from the oropharynx. Post-surgery, the
anesthesiologist gradually changes the mixture of the gases that keep the patient unconscious, and when the
muscles of respiration begin to function, the tube is removed. It still takes about 30 minutes for a patient to
wake up, and for breathing muscles to regain control of respiration. After surgery, most people have a sore or
scratchy throat for a few days.
410
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
The strap-like infrahyoid muscles generally depress the hyoid bone and control the position of the larynx. The
omohyoid muscle, which has superior and inferior bellies, depresses the hyoid bone in conjunction with the
sternohyoid and thyrohyoid muscles. The thyrohyoid muscle also elevates the larynx’s thyroid cartilage, whereas
the sternothyroid depresses it to create different tones of voice.
Muscles That Move the Head
The head, attached to the top of the vertebral column, is balanced, moved, and rotated by the neck muscles (Table
11.5). When these muscles act unilaterally, the head rotates. When they contract bilaterally, the head flexes or
extends. The major muscle that laterally flexes and rotates the head is the sternocleidomastoid. In addition, both
muscles working together are the flexors of the head. Place your fingers on both sides of the neck and turn your
head to the left and to the right. You will feel the movement originate there. This muscle divides the neck into
anterior and posterior triangles when viewed from the side (Figure 11.14).
FIGURE 11.14
Posterior and Lateral Views of the Neck
The superficial and deep muscles of the neck are responsible for moving the
head, cervical vertebrae, and scapulas.
Muscles That Move the Head
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime mover
Origin
Insertion
Rotates and
tilts head to
the side; tilts
head forward
Skull;
vertebrae
Individually: rotates
head to opposite
side; bilaterally:
flexion
Sternocleidomastoid
Sternum; clavicle
Temporal
bone
(mastoid
process);
occipital
bone
Rotates and
tilts head
backward
Skull;
vertebrae
Individually: laterally
flexes and rotates
head to same side;
bilaterally: extension
Semispinalis capitis
Transverse and
articular
processes of
cervical and
thoracic vertebra
Occipital
bone
TABLE 11.5
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
411
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime mover
Origin
Insertion
Rotates and
tilts head to
the side; tilts
head
backward
Skull;
vertebrae
Individually: laterally
flexes and rotates
head to same side;
bilaterally: extension
Splenius capitis
Spinous
processes of
cervical and
thoracic vertebra
Temporal
bone
(mastoid
process);
occipital
bone
Rotates and
tilts head to
the side; tilts
head
backward
Skull;
vertebrae
Individually: laterally
flexes and rotates
head to same side;
bilaterally: extension
Longissimus capitis
Transverse and
articular
processes of
cervical and
thoracic vertebra
Temporal
bone
(mastoid
process)
TABLE 11.5
Muscles of the Posterior Neck and the Back
The posterior muscles of the neck are primarily concerned with head movements, like extension. The back muscles
stabilize and move the vertebral column, and are grouped according to the lengths and direction of the fascicles.
The splenius muscles originate at the midline and run laterally and superiorly to their insertions. From the sides and
the back of the neck, the splenius capitis inserts onto the head region, and the splenius cervicis extends onto the
cervical region. These muscles can extend the head, laterally flex it, and rotate it (Figure 11.15).
412
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.15
Muscles of the Neck and Back
The large, complex muscles of the neck and back move the head, shoulders, and
vertebral column.
The erector spinae group forms the majority of the muscle mass of the back and it is the primary extensor of the
vertebral column. It controls flexion, lateral flexion, and rotation of the vertebral column, and maintains the lumbar
curve. The erector spinae comprises the iliocostalis (laterally placed) group, the longissimus (intermediately placed)
group, and the spinalis (medially placed) group.
The iliocostalis group includes the iliocostalis cervicis, associated with the cervical region; the iliocostalis
thoracis, associated with the thoracic region; and the iliocostalis lumborum, associated with the lumbar region.
The three muscles of the longissimus group are the longissimus capitis, associated with the head region; the
longissimus cervicis, associated with the cervical region; and the longissimus thoracis, associated with the
thoracic region. The third group, the spinalis group, comprises the spinalis capitis (head region), the spinalis
cervicis (cervical region), and the spinalis thoracis (thoracic region).
The transversospinales muscles run from the transverse processes to the spinous processes of the vertebrae.
Similar to the erector spinae muscles, the semispinalis muscles in this group are named for the areas of the body
with which they are associated. The semispinalis muscles include the semispinalis capitis, the semispinalis
cervicis, and the semispinalis thoracis. The multifidus muscle of the lumbar region helps extend and laterally flex
11.3 • Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back
413
the vertebral column.
Important in the stabilization of the vertebral column is the segmental muscle group, which includes the
interspinales and intertransversarii muscles. These muscles bring together the spinous and transverse processes of
each consecutive vertebra. Finally, the scalene muscles work together to flex, laterally flex, and rotate the head.
They also contribute to deep inhalation. The scalene muscles include the anterior scalene muscle (anterior to the
middle scalene), the middle scalene muscle (the longest, intermediate between the anterior and posterior
scalenes), and the posterior scalene muscle (the smallest, posterior to the middle scalene).
11.4 Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the intrinsic skeletal muscles of the back and neck, and the skeletal muscles of the abdominal wall and
thorax
•
Identify the movement and function of the intrinsic skeletal muscles of the back and neck, and the skeletal
muscles of the abdominal wall and thorax
It is a complex job to balance the body on two feet and walk upright. The muscles of the vertebral column, thorax,
and abdominal wall extend, flex, and stabilize different parts of the body’s trunk. The deep muscles of the core of
the body help maintain posture as well as carry out other functions. The brain sends out electrical impulses to these
various muscle groups to control posture by alternate contraction and relaxation. This is necessary so that no single
muscle group becomes fatigued too quickly. If any one group fails to function, body posture will be compromised.
Muscles of the Abdomen
There are four pairs of abdominal muscles that cover the anterior and lateral abdominal region and meet at the
anterior midline. These muscles of the anterolateral abdominal wall can be divided into four groups: the external
obliques, the internal obliques, the transversus abdominis, and the rectus abdominis (Figure 11.16 and Table 11.6).
414
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.16
Muscles of the Abdomen
(a) The anterior abdominal muscles include the medially located rectus abdominis, which is
covered by a sheet of connective tissue called the rectus sheath. On the flanks of the body, medial to the rectus abdominis, the abdominal
wall is composed of three layers. The external oblique muscles form the superficial layer, while the internal oblique muscles form the
middle layer, and the transversus abdominis forms the deepest layer. (b) The muscles of the lower back move the lumbar spine but also
assist in femur movements.
11.4 • Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
415
Muscles of the Abdomen
Movement
Target
Target
motion
direction
Prime mover
Origin
Insertion
Twisting at waist; also bending to the
side
Vertebral
column
Supination;
lateral
flexion
External
obliques;
internal
obliques
Ribs
5–12;
ilium
Ribs 7–10;
linea alba;
ilium
Squeezing abdomen during forceful
exhalations, defecation, urination, and
childbirth
Abdominal
cavity
Compression
Transversus
abdominis
Ilium;
ribs
5–10
Sternum;
linea alba;
pubis
Sitting up
Vertebral
column
Flexion
Rectus
abdominis
Pubis
Sternum;
ribs 5 and
7
Bending to the side
Vertebral
column
Lateral
flexion
Quadratus
lumborum
Ilium;
ribs
5–10
Rib 12;
vertebrae
L1–L4
TABLE 11.6
There are three flat skeletal muscles in the antero-lateral wall of the abdomen. The external oblique, closest to the
surface, extend inferiorly and medially, in the direction of sliding one’s four fingers into pants pockets. Perpendicular
to it is the intermediate internal oblique, extending superiorly and medially, the direction the thumbs usually go
when the other fingers are in the pants pocket. The deep muscle, the transversus abdominis, is arranged
transversely around the abdomen, similar to the front of a belt on a pair of pants. This arrangement of three bands of
muscles in different orientations allows various movements and rotations of the trunk. The three layers of muscle
also help to protect the internal abdominal organs in an area where there is no bone.
The linea alba is a white, fibrous band that is made of the bilateral rectus sheaths that join at the anterior midline of
the body. These enclose the rectus abdominis muscles (a pair of long, linear muscles, commonly called the “sit-up”
muscles) that originate at the pubic crest and symphysis, and extend the length of the body’s trunk. Each muscle is
segmented by three transverse bands of collagen fibers called the tendinous intersections. This results in the look
of “six-pack abs,” as each segment hypertrophies on individuals at the gym who do many sit-ups.
The posterior abdominal wall is formed by the lumbar vertebrae, parts of the ilia of the hip bones, psoas major and
iliacus muscles, and quadratus lumborum muscle. This part of the core plays a key role in stabilizing the rest of the
body and maintaining posture.
CAREER CONNECTION
Physical Therapists
Those who have a muscle or joint injury will most likely be sent to a physical therapist (PT) after seeing their regular
doctor. PTs have a master’s degree or doctorate, and are highly trained experts in the mechanics of body
movements. Many PTs also specialize in sports injuries.
If you injured your shoulder while you were kayaking, the first thing a physical therapist would do during your first
visit is to assess the functionality of the joint. The range of motion of a particular joint refers to the normal
movements the joint performs. The PT will ask you to abduct and adduct, circumduct, and flex and extend the arm.
The PT will note the shoulder’s degree of function, and based on the assessment of the injury, will create an
416
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
appropriate physical therapy plan.
The first step in physical therapy will probably be applying a heat pack to the injured site, which acts much like a
warm-up to draw blood to the area, to enhance healing. You will be instructed to do a series of exercises to continue
the therapy at home, followed by icing, to decrease inflammation and swelling, which will continue for several
weeks. When physical therapy is complete, the PT will do an exit exam and send a detailed report on the improved
range of motion and return of normal limb function to your doctor. Gradually, as the injury heals, the shoulder will
begin to function correctly. A PT works closely with patients to help them get back to their normal level of physical
activity.
Muscles of the Thorax
The muscles of the chest serve to facilitate breathing by changing the size of the thoracic cavity (Table 11.7). When
you inhale, your chest rises because the cavity expands. Alternately, when you exhale, your chest falls because the
thoracic cavity decreases in size.
Muscles of the Thorax
Movement
Target
Target motion direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Inhalation;
exhalation
Thoracic
cavity
Compression; expansion
Diaphragm
Sternum; ribs
6–12; lumbar
vertebrae
Central
tendon
Inhalation;exhalation
Ribs
Elevation (expands
thoracic cavity)
External
intercostals
Rib superior
to each
intercostal
muscle
Rib inferior to
each
intercostal
muscle
Forced exhalation
Ribs
Movement along
superior/inferior axis to
bring ribs closer together
Internal
intercostals
Rib inferior to
each
intercostal
muscle
Rib superior
to each
intercostal
muscle
TABLE 11.7
The Diaphragm
The change in volume of the thoracic cavity during breathing is due to the alternate contraction and relaxation of the
diaphragm (Figure 11.17). It separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities, and is dome-shaped at rest. The
superior surface of the diaphragm is convex, creating the elevated floor of the thoracic cavity. The inferior surface is
concave, creating the curved roof of the abdominal cavity.
11.4 • Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
417
FIGURE 11.17
Muscles of the Diaphragm
The diaphragm separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
Defecating, urination, and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and abdominal muscles (this
cooperation is referred to as the “Valsalva maneuver”). You hold your breath by a steady contraction of the
diaphragm; this stabilizes the volume and pressure of the peritoneal cavity. When the abdominal muscles contract,
the pressure cannot push the diaphragm up, so it increases pressure on the intestinal tract (defecation), urinary
tract (urination), or reproductive tract (childbirth).
The inferior surface of the pericardial sac and the inferior surfaces of the pleural membranes (parietal pleura) fuse
onto the central tendon of the diaphragm. To the sides of the tendon are the skeletal muscle portions of the
diaphragm, which insert into the tendon while having a number of origins including the xiphoid process of the
sternum anteriorly, the inferior six ribs and their cartilages laterally, and the lumbar vertebrae and 12th ribs
posteriorly.
The diaphragm also includes three openings for the passage of structures between the thorax and the abdomen.
The inferior vena cava passes through the caval opening, and the esophagus and attached nerves pass through the
esophageal hiatus. The aorta, thoracic duct, and azygous vein pass through the aortic hiatus of the posterior
diaphragm.
The Intercostal Muscles
There are three sets of muscles, called intercostal muscles, which span each of the intercostal spaces. The
principal role of the intercostal muscles is to assist in breathing by changing the dimensions of the rib cage (Figure
11.18).
418
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.18
Intercostal Muscles
The external intercostals are located laterally on the sides of the body. The internal intercostals are
located medially near the sternum. The innermost intercostals are located deep to both the internal and external intercostals.
The 11 pairs of superficial external intercostal muscles aid in inspiration of air during breathing because when they
contract, they raise the rib cage, which expands it. The 11 pairs of internal intercostal muscles, just under the
externals, are used for expiration because they draw the ribs together to constrict the rib cage. The innermost
intercostal muscles are the deepest, and they act as synergists for the action of the internal intercostals.
Muscles of the Pelvic Floor and Perineum
The pelvic floor is a muscular sheet that defines the inferior portion of the pelvic cavity. The pelvic diaphragm,
spanning anteriorly to posteriorly from the pubis to the coccyx, comprises the levator ani and the ischiococcygeus.
Its openings include the anal canal and urethra, and the vagina in females.
The large levator ani consists of two skeletal muscles, the pubococcygeus and the iliococcygeus (Figure 11.19).
The levator ani is considered the most important muscle of the pelvic floor because it supports the pelvic viscera. It
resists the pressure produced by contraction of the abdominal muscles so that the pressure is applied to the colon
to aid in defecation and to the uterus to aid in childbirth (assisted by the ischiococcygeus, which pulls the coccyx
anteriorly). This muscle also creates skeletal muscle sphincters at the urethra and anus.
11.4 • Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
419
FIGURE 11.19
Muscles of the Pelvic Floor
The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic organs, resist intra-abdominal pressure, and
work as sphincters for the urethra, rectum, and vagina.
The perineum is the diamond-shaped space between the pubic symphysis (anteriorly), the coccyx (posteriorly), and
the ischial tuberosities (laterally), lying just inferior to the pelvic diaphragm (levator ani and coccygeus). Divided
transversely into triangles, the anterior is the urogenital triangle, which includes the external genitals. The
posterior is the anal triangle, which contains the anus (Figure 11.20). The perineum is also divided into superficial
and deep layers with some of the muscles common to people of any sex (Figure 11.21). Females also have the
compressor urethrae and the sphincter urethrovaginalis, which function to close the vagina. In males, there is the
deep transverse perineal muscle that plays a role in ejaculation.
FIGURE 11.20
Muscles of the Perineum
The perineum muscles play roles in urination in both sexes, ejaculation in males, and vaginal
contraction in females.
420
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.21
Muscles of the Perineum Common to All Humans
11.5 Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the muscles of the pectoral girdle and upper limbs
•
Identify the movement and function of the pectoral girdle and upper limbs
Muscles of the shoulder and upper limb can be divided into four groups: muscles that stabilize and position the
pectoral girdle, muscles that move the arm, muscles that move the forearm, and muscles that move the wrists,
hands, and fingers. The pectoral girdle, or shoulder girdle, consists of the lateral ends of the clavicle and scapula,
along with the proximal end of the humerus, and the muscles covering these three bones to stabilize the shoulder
joint. The girdle creates a base from which the head of the humerus, in its ball-and-socket joint with the glenoid
fossa of the scapula, can move the arm in multiple directions.
Muscles That Position the Pectoral Girdle
Muscles that position the pectoral girdle are located either on the anterior thorax or on the posterior thorax (Figure
11.22 and Table 11.8). The anterior muscles include the subclavius, pectoralis minor, and serratus anterior. The
posterior muscles include the trapezius, rhomboid major, and rhomboid minor. When the rhomboids are
contracted, your scapula moves medially, which can pull the shoulder and upper limb posteriorly.
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
421
FIGURE 11.22
Muscles That Position the Pectoral Girdle
The muscles that stabilize the pectoral girdle make it a steady base on
which other muscles can move the arm. Note that the pectoralis major and deltoid, which move the humerus, are cut here to show the
deeper positioning muscles.
Muscles that Position the Pectoral Girdle
Position
in the
thorax
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Anterior
thorax
Stabilizes clavicle
during movement by
depressing it
Clavicle
Depression
Subclavius
First rib
Inferior
surface of
clavicle
Anterior
thorax
Rotates shoulder
anteriorly (throwing
motion); assists with
inhalation
Scapula;
ribs
Scapula: depresses;
ribs: elevates
Pectoralis
minor
Anterior
surfaces
of certain
ribs (2–4
or 3–5)
Coracoid
process of
scapula
Anterior
thorax
Moves arm from side
of body to front of
body; assists with
inhalation
Scapula;
ribs
Scapula: protracts;
ribs: elevates
Serratus
anterior
Muscle
slips from
certain
ribs (1–8
or 1–9)
Anterior
surface of
vertebral
border of
scapula
Posterior
thorax
Elevates shoulders
(shrugging); pulls
shoulder blades
together; tilts head
backwards
Scapula;
cervical
spine
Scapula: rotests
inferiorly, retracts,
elevates, and
depresses; spine:
extends
Trapezius
Skull;
vertebral
column
Acromion
and spine
of scapula;
clavicle
TABLE 11.8
422
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Position
in the
thorax
Movement
Target
Target motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Posterior
thorax
Stabilizes scapula
during pectoral girdle
movement
Scapula
Retracts; rotates
inferiorly
Rhomboid
major
Thoracic
vertebrae
(T2–T5)
Medial
border of
scapula
Posterior
thorax
Stabilizes scapula
during pectoral girdle
movement
Scapula
Retracts; rotates
inferiorly
Rhomboid
minor
Cervical
and
thoracic
vertebrae
(C7 and
T1)
Medial
border of
scapula
TABLE 11.8
Muscles That Move the Humerus
Similar to the muscles that position the pectoral girdle, muscles that cross the shoulder joint and move the humerus
bone of the arm include both axial and scapular muscles (Figure 11.23 and Figure 11.24). The two axial muscles are
the pectoralis major and the latissimus dorsi. The pectoralis major is thick and fan-shaped, covering much of the
superior portion of the anterior thorax. The broad, triangular latissimus dorsi is located on the inferior part of the
back, where it inserts into a thick connective tissue sheath called an aponeurosis.
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
423
FIGURE 11.23
Muscles That Move the Humerus
(a, c) The muscles that move the humerus anteriorly are generally located on the
anterior side of the body and originate from the sternum (e.g., pectoralis major) or the anterior side of the scapula (e.g., subscapularis). (b)
The muscles that move the humerus superiorly generally originate from the superior surfaces of the scapula and/or the clavicle (e.g.,
deltoids). The muscles that move the humerus inferiorly generally originate from middle or lower back (e.g., latissiumus dorsi). (d) The
muscles that move the humerus posteriorly are generally located on the posterior side of the body and insert into the scapula (e.g.,
infraspinatus).
424
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.24
Muscles That Move the Humerus
The rest of the shoulder muscles originate on the scapula. The anatomical and ligamental structure of the shoulder
joint and the arrangements of the muscles covering it, allows the arm to carry out different types of movements. The
deltoid, the thick muscle that creates the rounded lines of the shoulder is the major abductor of the arm, but it also
facilitates flexing and medial rotation, as well as extension and lateral rotation. The subscapularis originates on the
anterior scapula and medially rotates the arm. Named for their locations, the supraspinatus (superior to the spine
of the scapula) and the infraspinatus (inferior to the spine of the scapula) abduct the arm, and laterally rotate the
arm, respectively. The thick and flat teres major is inferior to the teres minor and extends the arm, and assists in
adduction and medial rotation of it. The long teres minor laterally rotates and extends the arm. Finally, the
coracobrachialis flexes and adducts the arm.
The tendons of the deep subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor connect the scapula to the
humerus, forming the rotator cuff (musculotendinous cuff), the circle of tendons around the shoulder joint. When
baseball pitchers undergo shoulder surgery it is usually on the rotator cuff, which becomes pinched and inflamed,
and may tear away from the bone due to the repetitive motion of bring the arm overhead to throw a fast pitch.
Muscles That Move the Forearm
The forearm, made of the radius and ulna bones, has four main types of action at the hinge of the elbow joint:
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
425
flexion, extension, pronation, and supination. The forearm flexors include the biceps brachii, brachialis, and
brachioradialis. The extensors are the triceps brachii and anconeus. The pronators are the pronator teres and the
pronator quadratus, and the supinator is the only one that turns the forearm anteriorly. When the forearm faces
anteriorly, it is supinated. When the forearm faces posteriorly, it is pronated.
The biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis flex the forearm. The two-headed biceps brachii crosses the
shoulder and elbow joints to flex the forearm, also taking part in supinating the forearm at the radioulnar joints and
flexing the arm at the shoulder joint. Deep to the biceps brachii, the brachialis provides additional power in flexing
the forearm. Finally, the brachioradialis can flex the forearm quickly or help lift a load slowly. These muscles and
their associated blood vessels and nerves form the anterior compartment of the arm (anterior flexor compartment
of the arm) (Figure 11.25 and Figure 11.26).
426
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.25
Muscles That Move the Forearm
The muscles originating in the upper arm flex, extend, pronate, and supinate the
forearm. The muscles originating in the forearm move the wrists, hands, and fingers.
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
427
FIGURE 11.26
Muscles That Move the Forearm
Muscles That Move the Wrist, Hand, and Fingers
Wrist, hand, and finger movements are facilitated by two groups of muscles. The forearm is the origin of the
extrinsic muscles of the hand. The palm is the origin of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.
Muscles of the Arm That Move the Wrists, Hands, and Fingers
The muscles in the anterior compartment of the forearm (anterior flexor compartment of the forearm) originate on
the humerus and insert onto different parts of the hand. These make up the bulk of the forearm. From lateral to
medial, the superficial anterior compartment of the forearm includes the flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus,
flexor carpi ulnaris, and flexor digitorum superficialis. The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the hand as well as
the digits at the knuckles, which allows for rapid finger movements, as in typing or playing a musical instrument (see
Figure 11.27 and Table 11.9). However, poor ergonomics can irritate the tendons of these muscles as they slide
back and forth with the carpal tunnel of the anterior wrist and pinch the median nerve, which also travels through
the tunnel, causing Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. The deep anterior compartment produces flexion and bends fingers
to make a fist. These are the flexor pollicis longus and the flexor digitorum profundus.
The muscles in the superficial posterior compartment of the forearm (superficial posterior extensor compartment
of the forearm) originate on the humerus. These are the extensor radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis,
extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi, and the extensor carpi ulnaris.
The muscles of the deep posterior compartment of the forearm (deep posterior extensor compartment of the
forearm) originate on the radius and ulna. These include the abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis,
428
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
extensor pollicis longus, and extensor indicis (see Figure 11.27).
FIGURE 11.27
Muscles That Move the Wrist, Hands, and Forearm
The tendons of the forearm muscles attach to the wrist and extend into the hand. Fibrous bands called retinacula
sheath the tendons at the wrist. The flexor retinaculum extends over the palmar surface of the hand while the
extensor retinaculum extends over the dorsal surface of the hand.
Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
The intrinsic muscles of the hand both originate and insert within it (Figure 11.28). These muscles allow your
fingers to also make precise movements for actions, such as typing or writing. These muscles are divided into three
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
429
groups. The thenar muscles are on the radial aspect of the palm. The hypothenar muscles are on the medial aspect
of the palm, and the intermediate muscles are midpalmar.
The thenar muscles include the abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, and the
adductor pollicis. These muscles form the thenar eminence, the rounded contour of the base of the thumb, and all
act on the thumb. The movements of the thumb play an integral role in most precise movements of the hand.
The hypothenar muscles include the abductor digiti minimi, flexor digiti minimi brevis, and the opponens digiti
minimi. These muscles form the hypothenar eminence, the rounded contour of the little finger, and as such, they
all act on the little finger. Finally, the intermediate muscles act on all the fingers and include the lumbrical, the
palmar interossei, and the dorsal interossei.
FIGURE 11.28
Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
The intrinsic muscles of the hand both originate and insert within the hand. These
muscles provide the fine motor control of the fingers by flexing, extending, abducting, and adducting the more distal finger and thumb
segments.
430
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
Muscle
Movement
Target
Target
motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Thenar
muscles
Moves thumb toward
body
Thumb
Abduction
Abductor
pollicis
brevis
Flexor
retinaculum;
and nearby
carpals
Lateral base of
proximal
phalanx of
thumb
Thenar
muscles
Moves thumb across
palm to touch other
fingers
Thumb
Opposition
Opponens
pollicis
Flexor
retinaculum;
trapezium
Anterior of first
metacarpal
Thenar
muscles
Flexes thumb
Thumb
Flexion
Flexor
pollicis
brevis
Flexor
retinaculum;
trapezium
Lateral base of
proximal
phalanx of
thumb
Thenar
muscles
Moves thumb away
from body
Thumb
Adduction
Adductor
pollicis
Capitate
bone; bases
of
metacarpals
2–4; front of
metacarpal
3
Medial base of
proximal
phalanx of
thumb
Hypothenar
muscles
Moves little finger
toward body
Little
finger
Abduction
Abductor
digiti
minimi
Pisiform
bone
Medial side of
proximal
phalanx of little
finger
Hypothenar
muscles
Flexes little finger
Little
finger
Flexion
Flexor
digiti
minimi
brevis
Hamate
bone; flexor
retinaculum
Medial side of
proximal
phalanx of little
finger
Hypothenar
muscles
Moves little finger
across palm to touch
thumb
Little
finger
Opposition
Opponens
digiti
minimi
Hamate
bone; flexor
retinaculum
Medial side of
fifth metacarpal
Intermediate
muscles
Flexes each finger at
metacarpo-
phalangeal joints;
extends each finger
at interphalangeal
joints
Fingers
Flexion
Lumbricals
Palm
(lateral
sides of
tendons in
flexor
digitorum
profundus)
Fingers 2–5
(lateral edges of
extensional
expansions on
first phalanges)
TABLE 11.9
11.5 • Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
431
Muscle
Movement
Target
Target
motion
direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Intermediate
muscles
Adducts and flexes
each finger at
metacarpo-
phalangeal joints;
extends each finger
at interphalangeal
joints
Fingers
Adduction;
flexion;
extension
Palmar
interossei
Side of each
metacarpal
that faces
metacarpal
3 (absent
from
metacarpal
3)
Extensor
expansion on
first phalanx of
each finger
(except finger 3)
on side facing
finger 3
Intermediate
muscles
Abducts and flexes
the three middle
fingers at metacarpo-
phalangeal joints;
extends the three
middle fingers at
interphalangeal joints
Fingers
Abduction;
flexion;
extension
Dorsal
interossei
Sides of
metacarpals
Both sides of
finger 3; for
each other
finger, extensor
expansion over
first phalanx on
side opposite
finger 3
TABLE 11.9
11.6 Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the appendicular muscles of the pelvic girdle and lower limb
•
Identify the movement and function of the pelvic girdle and lower limb
The appendicular muscles of the lower body position and stabilize the pelvic girdle, which serves as a foundation
for the lower limbs. Comparatively, there is much more movement at the pectoral girdle than at the pelvic girdle.
There is very little movement of the pelvic girdle because of its connection with the sacrum at the base of the axial
skeleton. The pelvic girdle is less range of motion because it was designed to stabilize and support the body.
Muscles of the Thigh
What would happen if the pelvic girdle, which attaches the lower limbs to the torso, were capable of the same range
of motion as the pectoral girdle? For one thing, walking would expend more energy if the heads of the femurs were
not secured in the acetabula of the pelvis. The body’s center of gravity is in the area of the pelvis. If the center of
gravity were not to remain fixed, standing up would be difficult as well. Therefore, what the leg muscles lack in range
of motion and versatility, they make up for in size and power, facilitating the body’s stabilization, posture, and
movement.
Gluteal Region Muscles That Move the Femur
Most muscles that insert on the femur (the thigh bone) and move it, originate on the pelvic girdle. The psoas major
and iliacus make up the iliopsoas group. Some of the largest and most powerful muscles in the body are the gluteal
muscles or gluteal group. The gluteus maximus is the largest; deep to the gluteus maximus is the gluteus medius,
and deep to the gluteus medius is the gluteus minimus, the smallest of the trio (Figure 11.29 and Figure 11.30).
432
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 11.29
Hip and Thigh Muscles
The large and powerful muscles of the hip that move the femur generally originate on the pelvic
girdle and insert into the femur. The muscles that move the lower leg typically originate on the femur and insert into the bones of the knee
joint. The anterior muscles of the femur extend the lower leg but also aid in flexing the thigh. The posterior muscles of the femur flex the
lower leg but also aid in extending the thigh. A combination of gluteal and thigh muscles also adduct, abduct, and rotate the thigh and lower
leg.
11.6 • Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
433
FIGURE 11.30
Gluteal Region Muscles That Move the Femur
The tensor fascia latae is a thick, squarish muscle in the superior aspect of the lateral thigh. It acts as a synergist of
the gluteus medius and iliopsoas in flexing and abducting the thigh. It also helps stabilize the lateral aspect of the
434
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
knee by pulling on the iliotibial tract (band), making it taut. Deep to the gluteus maximus, the piriformis, obturator
internus, obturator externus, superior gemellus, inferior gemellus, and quadratus femoris laterally rotate the
femur at the hip.
The adductor longus, adductor brevis, and adductor magnus can both medially and laterally rotate the thigh
depending on the placement of the foot. The adductor longus flexes the thigh, whereas the adductor magnus
extends it. The pectineus adducts and flexes the femur at the hip as well. The pectineus is located in the femoral
triangle, which is formed at the junction between the hip and the leg and also includes the femoral nerve, the
femoral artery, the femoral vein, and the deep inguinal lymph nodes.
Thigh Muscles That Move the Femur, Tibia, and Fibula
Deep fascia in the thigh separates it into medial, anterior, and posterior compartments (see Figure 11.29 and Figure
11.31). The muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh are responsible for adducting the femur at the hip.
Along with the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, and pectineus, the strap-like gracilis adducts
the thigh in addition to flexing the leg at the knee.
11.6 • Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
435
FIGURE 11.31
Thigh Muscles That Move the Femur, Tibia, and Fibula
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the thigh flex the thigh and extend the leg. This compartment
contains the quadriceps femoris group, which actually comprises four muscles that extend and stabilize the knee.
The rectus femoris is on the anterior aspect of the thigh, the vastus lateralis is on the lateral aspect of the thigh,
the vastus medialis is on the medial aspect of the thigh, and the vastus intermedius is between the vastus lateralis
and vastus medialis and deep to the rectus femoris. The tendon common to all four is the quadriceps tendon
(patellar tendon), which inserts into the patella and continues below it as the patellar ligament. The patellar
ligament attaches to the tibial tuberosity. In addition to the quadriceps femoris, the sartorius is a band-like muscle
that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side of the proximal tibia. This versatile muscle
flexes the leg at the knee and flexes, abducts, and laterally rotates the leg at the hip. This muscle allows us to sit
436
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
cross-legged.
The posterior compartment of the thigh includes muscles that flex the leg and extend the thigh. The three long
muscles on the back of the knee are the hamstring group, which flexes the knee. These are the biceps femoris,
semitendinosus, and semimembranosus. The tendons of these muscles form the popliteal fossa, the diamond-
shaped space at the back of the knee.
Muscles That Move the Feet and Toes
Similar to the thigh muscles, the muscles of the leg are divided by deep fascia into compartments, although the leg
has three: anterior, lateral, and posterior (Figure 11.32 and Figure 11.33).
FIGURE 11.32
Muscles of the Lower Leg
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for
dorsiflexion, and the muscles of the posterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for plantar flexion. The lateral and
medial muscles in both compartments invert, evert, and rotate the foot.
11.6 • Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
437
FIGURE 11.33
Muscles That Move the Feet and Toes
The muscles in the anterior compartment of the leg: the tibialis anterior, a long and thick muscle on the lateral
surface of the tibia, the extensor hallucis longus, deep under it, and the extensor digitorum longus, lateral to it, all
contribute to raising the front of the foot when they contract. The fibularis tertius, a small muscle that originates on
the anterior surface of the fibula, is associated with the extensor digitorum longus and sometimes fused to it, but is
not present in all people. Thick bands of connective tissue called the superior extensor retinaculum (transverse
ligament of the ankle) and the inferior extensor retinaculum, hold the tendons of these muscles in place during
dorsiflexion.
438
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
The lateral compartment of the leg includes two muscles: the fibularis longus (peroneus longus) and the fibularis
brevis (peroneus brevis). The superficial muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg all insert onto the
calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon), a strong tendon that inserts into the calcaneal bone of the ankle. The muscles
in this compartment are large and strong and keep humans upright. The most superficial and visible muscle of the
calf is the gastrocnemius. Deep to the gastrocnemius is the wide, flat soleus. The plantaris runs obliquely between
the two; some people may have two of these muscles, whereas no plantaris is observed in about seven percent of
other cadaver dissections. The plantaris tendon is a desirable substitute for the fascia lata in hernia repair, tendon
transplants, and repair of ligaments. There are four deep muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg as well:
the popliteus, flexor digitorum longus, flexor hallucis longus, and tibialis posterior.
The foot also has intrinsic muscles, which originate and insert within it (similar to the intrinsic muscles of the hand).
These muscles primarily provide support for the foot and its arch, and contribute to movements of the toes (Figure
11.34 and Figure 11.35). The principal support for the longitudinal arch of the foot is a deep fascia called plantar
aponeurosis, which runs from the calcaneus bone to the toes (inflammation of this tissue is the cause of “plantar
fasciitis,” which can affect runners. The intrinsic muscles of the foot consist of two groups. The dorsal group
includes only one muscle, the extensor digitorum brevis. The second group is the plantar group, which consists of
four layers, starting with the most superficial.
FIGURE 11.34
Intrinsic Muscles of the Foot
The muscles along the dorsal side of the foot (a) generally extend the toes while the
muscles of the plantar side of the foot (b, c, d) generally flex the toes. The plantar muscles exist in three layers, providing the foot the
strength to counterbalance the weight of the body. In this diagram, these three layers are shown from a plantar view beginning with the
bottom-most layer just under the plantar skin of the foot (b) and ending with the top-most layer (d) located just inferior to the foot and toe
bones.
11.6 • Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic Girdle and Lower Limbs
439
FIGURE 11.35
Intrinsic Muscles in the Foot
440
11 • The Muscular System
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
abduct
move away from midline in the sagittal plane
abductor
moves the bone away from the midline
abductor digiti minimi
muscle that abducts the little
finger
abductor pollicis brevis
muscle that abducts the
thumb
abductor pollicis longus
muscle that inserts into the
first metacarpal
adductor
moves the bone toward the midline
adductor brevis
muscle that adducts and medially
rotates the thigh
adductor longus
muscle that adducts, medially
rotates, and flexes the thigh
adductor magnus
muscle with an anterior fascicle
that adducts, medially rotates and flexes the thigh,
and a posterior fascicle that assists in thigh
extension
adductor pollicis
muscle that adducts the thumb
agonist
(also, prime mover) muscle whose
contraction is responsible for producing a particular
motion
anal triangle
posterior triangle of the perineum that
includes the anus
anconeus
small muscle on the lateral posterior elbow
that extends the forearm
antagonist
muscle that opposes the action of an
agonist
anterior compartment of the arm
(anterior flexor
compartment of the arm) the biceps brachii,
brachialis, brachioradialis, and their associated
blood vessels and nerves
anterior compartment of the forearm
(anterior
flexor compartment of the forearm) deep and
superficial muscles that originate on the humerus
and insert into the hand
anterior compartment of the leg
region that includes
muscles that dorsiflex the foot
anterior compartment of the thigh
region that
includes muscles that flex the thigh and extend the
leg
anterior scalene
a muscle anterior to the middle
scalene
appendicular
of the arms and legs
axial
of the trunk and head
belly
bulky central body of a muscle
bi
two
biceps brachii
two-headed muscle that crosses the
shoulder and elbow joints to flex the forearm while
assisting in supinating it and flexing the arm at the
shoulder
biceps femoris
hamstring muscle
bipennate
pennate muscle that has fascicles that are
located on both sides of the tendon
brachialis
muscle deep to the biceps brachii that
provides power in flexing the forearm.
brachioradialis
muscle that can flex the forearm
quickly or help lift a load slowly
brevis
short
buccinator
muscle that compresses the cheek
calcaneal tendon
(also, Achilles tendon) strong
tendon that inserts into the calcaneal bone of the
ankle
caval opening
opening in the diaphragm that allows
the inferior vena cava to pass through; foramen for
the vena cava
circular
(also, sphincter) fascicles that are
concentrically arranged around an opening
compressor urethrae
deep perineal muscle in
females
convergent
fascicles that extend over a broad area
and converge on a common attachment site
coracobrachialis
muscle that flexes and adducts the
arm
corrugator supercilii
prime mover of the eyebrows
deep anterior compartment
flexor pollicis longus,
flexor digitorum profundus, and their associated
blood vessels and nerves
deep posterior compartment of the forearm
(deep
posterior extensor compartment of the forearm) the
abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis,
extensor pollicis longus, extensor indicis, and their
associated blood vessels and nerves
deep transverse perineal
deep perineal muscle in
males
deglutition
swallowing
deltoid
shoulder muscle that abducts the arm as well
as flexes and medially rotates it, and extends and
laterally rotates it
diaphragm
skeletal muscle that separates the
thoracic and abdominal cavities and is dome-
shaped at rest
digastric
muscle that has anterior and posterior
bellies and elevates the hyoid bone and larynx when
one swallows; it also depresses the mandible
dorsal group
region that includes the extensor
digitorum brevis
dorsal interossei
muscles that abduct and flex the
three middle fingers at the metacarpophalangeal
joints and extend them at the interphalangeal joints
epicranial aponeurosis
(also, galea aponeurosis) flat
broad tendon that connects the frontalis and
occipitalis
erector spinae group
large muscle mass of the back;
primary extensor of the vertebral column
11 • Key Terms
441
extensor
muscle that increases the angle at the joint
extensor carpi radialis brevis
muscle that extends
and abducts the hand at the wrist
extensor carpi ulnaris
muscle that extends and
adducts the hand
extensor digiti minimi
muscle that extends the little
finger
extensor digitorum
muscle that extends the hand at
the wrist and the phalanges
extensor digitorum brevis
muscle that extends the
toes
extensor digitorum longus
muscle that is lateral to
the tibialis anterior
extensor hallucis longus
muscle that is partly deep
to the tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus
extensor indicis
muscle that inserts onto the tendon
of the extensor digitorum of the index finger
extensor pollicis brevis
muscle that inserts onto the
base of the proximal phalanx of the thumb
extensor pollicis longus
muscle that inserts onto the
base of the distal phalanx of the thumb
extensor radialis longus
muscle that extends and
abducts the hand at the wrist
extensor retinaculum
band of connective tissue that
extends over the dorsal surface of the hand
external intercostal
superficial intercostal muscles
that raise the rib cage
external oblique
superficial abdominal muscle with
fascicles that extend inferiorly and medially
extrinsic eye muscles
originate outside the eye and
insert onto the outer surface of the white of the eye,
and create eyeball movement
extrinsic muscles of the hand
muscles that move
the wrists, hands, and fingers and originate on the
arm
fascicle
muscle fibers bundled by perimysium into a
unit
femoral triangle
region formed at the junction
between the hip and the leg and includes the
pectineus, femoral nerve, femoral artery, femoral
vein, and deep inguinal lymph nodes
fibularis brevis
(also, peroneus brevis) muscle that
plantar flexes the foot at the ankle and everts it at
the intertarsal joints
fibularis longus
(also, peroneus longus) muscle that
plantar flexes the foot at the ankle and everts it at
the intertarsal joints
fibularis tertius
small muscle that is associated with
the extensor digitorum longus
fixator
synergist that assists an agonist by preventing
or reducing movement at another joint, thereby
stabilizing the origin of the agonist
flexion
movement that decreases the angle of a joint
flexor
muscle that decreases the angle at the joint
flexor carpi radialis
muscle that flexes and abducts
the hand at the wrist
flexor carpi ulnaris
muscle that flexes and adducts
the hand at the wrist
flexor digiti minimi brevis
muscle that flexes the
little finger
flexor digitorum longus
muscle that flexes the four
small toes
flexor digitorum profundus
muscle that flexes the
phalanges of the fingers and the hand at the wrist
flexor digitorum superficialis
muscle that flexes the
hand and the digits
flexor hallucis longus
muscle that flexes the big toe
flexor pollicis brevis
muscle that flexes the thumb
flexor pollicis longus
muscle that flexes the distal
phalanx of the thumb
flexor retinaculum
band of connective tissue that
extends over the palmar surface of the hand
frontalis
front part of the occipitofrontalis muscle
fusiform
muscle that has fascicles that are spindle-
shaped to create large bellies
gastrocnemius
most superficial muscle of the calf
genioglossus
muscle that originates on the mandible
and allows the tongue to move downward and
forward
geniohyoid
muscle that depresses the mandible, and
raises and pulls the hyoid bone anteriorly
gluteal group
muscle group that extends, flexes,
rotates, adducts, and abducts the femur
gluteus maximus
largest of the gluteus muscles that
extends the femur
gluteus medius
muscle deep to the gluteus maximus
that abducts the femur at the hip
gluteus minimus
smallest of the gluteal muscles and
deep to the gluteus medius
gracilis
muscle that adducts the thigh and flexes the
leg at the knee
hamstring group
three long muscles on the back of
the leg
hyoglossus
muscle that originates on the hyoid bone
to move the tongue downward and flatten it
hypothenar
group of muscles on the medial aspect of
the palm
hypothenar eminence
rounded contour of muscle at
the base of the little finger
iliacus
muscle that, along with the psoas major,
makes up the iliopsoas
iliococcygeus
muscle that makes up the levator ani
along with the pubococcygeus
iliocostalis cervicis
muscle of the iliocostalis group
associated with the cervical region
iliocostalis group
laterally placed muscles of the
442
11 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
erector spinae
iliocostalis lumborum
muscle of the iliocostalis
group associated with the lumbar region
iliocostalis thoracis
muscle of the iliocostalis group
associated with the thoracic region
iliopsoas group
muscle group consisting of iliacus
and psoas major muscles, that flexes the thigh at
the hip, rotates it laterally, and flexes the trunk of
the body onto the hip
iliotibial tract
muscle that inserts onto the tibia;
made up of the gluteus maximus and connective
tissues of the tensor fasciae latae
inferior extensor retinaculum
cruciate ligament of
the ankle
inferior gemellus
muscle deep to the gluteus
maximus on the lateral surface of the thigh that
laterally rotates the femur at the hip
infrahyoid muscles
anterior neck muscles that are
attached to, and inferior to the hyoid bone
infraspinatus
muscle that laterally rotates the arm
innermost intercostal
the deepest intercostal
muscles that draw the ribs together
insertion
end of a skeletal muscle that is attached to
the structure (usually a bone) that is moved when
the muscle contracts
intercostal muscles
muscles that span the spaces
between the ribs
intermediate
group of midpalmar muscles
internal intercostal
muscles the intermediate
intercostal muscles that draw the ribs together
internal oblique
flat, intermediate abdominal muscle
with fascicles that run perpendicular to those of the
external oblique
intrinsic muscles of the hand
muscles that move the
wrists, hands, and fingers and originate in the palm
ischiococcygeus
muscle that assists the levator ani
and pulls the coccyx anteriorly
lateral compartment of the leg
region that includes
the fibularis (peroneus) longus and the fibularis
(peroneus) brevis and their associated blood
vessels and nerves
lateral pterygoid
muscle that moves the mandible
from side to side
lateralis
to the outside
latissimus dorsi
broad, triangular axial muscle
located on the inferior part of the back
levator ani
pelvic muscle that resists intra-abdominal
pressure and supports the pelvic viscera
linea alba
white, fibrous band that runs along the
midline of the trunk
longissimus capitis
muscle of the longissimus group
associated with the head region
longissimus cervicis
muscle of the longissimus
group associated with the cervical region
longissimus group
intermediately placed muscles of
the erector spinae
longissimus thoracis
muscle of the longissimus
group associated with the thoracic region
longus
long
lumbrical
muscle that flexes each finger at the
metacarpophalangeal joints and extend each finger
at the interphalangeal joints
masseter
main muscle for chewing that elevates the
mandible to close the mouth
mastication
chewing
maximus
largest
medial compartment of the thigh
a region that
includes the adductor longus, adductor brevis,
adductor magnus, pectineus, gracilis, and their
associated blood vessels and nerves
medial pterygoid
muscle that moves the mandible
from side to side
medialis
to the inside
medius
medium
middle scalene
longest scalene muscle, located
between the anterior and posterior scalenes
minimus
smallest
multifidus
muscle of the lumbar region that helps
extend and laterally flex the vertebral column
multipennate
pennate muscle that has a tendon
branching within it
mylohyoid
muscle that lifts the hyoid bone and helps
press the tongue to the top of the mouth
oblique
at an angle
obturator externus
muscle deep to the gluteus
maximus on the lateral surface of the thigh that
laterally rotates the femur at the hip
obturator internus
muscle deep to the gluteus
maximus on the lateral surface of the thigh that
laterally rotates the femur at the hip
occipitalis
posterior part of the occipitofrontalis
muscle
occipitofrontalis
muscle that makes up the scalp
with a frontal belly and an occipital belly
omohyoid
muscle that has superior and inferior
bellies and depresses the hyoid bone
opponens digiti minimi
muscle that brings the little
finger across the palm to meet the thumb
opponens pollicis
muscle that moves the thumb
across the palm to meet another finger
orbicularis oculi
circular muscle that closes the eye
orbicularis oris
circular muscle that moves the lips
origin
end of a skeletal muscle that is attached to
another structure (usually a bone) in a fixed position
palatoglossus
muscle that originates on the soft
palate to elevate the back of the tongue
11 • Key Terms
443
palmar interossei
muscles that abduct and flex each
finger at the metacarpophalangeal joints and extend
each finger at the interphalangeal joints
palmaris longus
muscle that provides weak flexion of
the hand at the wrist
parallel
fascicles that extend in the same direction as
the long axis of the muscle
patellar ligament
extension of the quadriceps tendon
below the patella
pectineus
muscle that abducts and flexes the femur
at the hip
pectoral girdle
shoulder girdle, made up of the
clavicle and scapula
pectoralis major
thick, fan-shaped axial muscle that
covers much of the superior thorax
pectoralis minor
muscle that moves the scapula and
assists in inhalation
pelvic diaphragm
muscular sheet that comprises the
levator ani and the ischiococcygeus
pelvic girdle
hips, a foundation for the lower limb
pennate
fascicles that are arranged differently based
on their angles to the tendon
perineum
diamond-shaped region between the pubic
symphysis, coccyx, and ischial tuberosities
piriformis
muscle deep to the gluteus maximus on
the lateral surface of the thigh that laterally rotates
the femur at the hip
plantar aponeurosis
muscle that supports the
longitudinal arch of the foot
plantar group
four-layered group of intrinsic foot
muscles
plantaris
muscle that runs obliquely between the
gastrocnemius and the soleus
popliteal fossa
diamond-shaped space at the back of
the knee
popliteus
muscle that flexes the leg at the knee and
creates the floor of the popliteal fossa
posterior compartment of the leg
region that
includes the superficial gastrocnemius, soleus, and
plantaris, and the deep popliteus, flexor digitorum
longus, flexor hallucis longus, and tibialis posterior
posterior compartment of the thigh
region that
includes muscles that flex the leg and extend the
thigh
posterior scalene
smallest scalene muscle, located
posterior to the middle scalene
prime mover
(also, agonist) principle muscle involved
in an action
pronator quadratus
pronator that originates on the
ulna and inserts on the radius
pronator teres
pronator that originates on the
humerus and inserts on the radius
psoas major
muscle that, along with the iliacus,
makes up the iliopsoas
pubococcygeus
muscle that makes up the levator ani
along with the iliococcygeus
quadratus femoris
muscle deep to the gluteus
maximus on the lateral surface of the thigh that
laterally rotates the femur at the hip
quadratus lumborum
posterior part of the abdominal
wall that helps with posture and stabilization of the
body
quadriceps femoris group
four muscles, that extend
and stabilize the knee
quadriceps tendon
(also, patellar tendon) tendon
common to all four quadriceps muscles, inserts into
the patella
rectus
straight
rectus abdominis
long, linear muscle that extends
along the middle of the trunk
rectus femoris
quadricep muscle on the anterior
aspect of the thigh
rectus sheaths
tissue that makes up the linea alba
retinacula
fibrous bands that sheath the tendons at
the wrist
rhomboid major
muscle that attaches the vertebral
border of the scapula to the spinous process of the
thoracic vertebrae
rhomboid minor
muscle that attaches the vertebral
border of the scapula to the spinous process of the
thoracic vertebrae
rotator cuff
(also, musculotendinous cuff) the circle
of tendons around the shoulder joint
sartorius
band-like muscle that flexes, abducts, and
laterally rotates the leg at the hip
scalene muscles
flex, laterally flex, and rotate the
head; contribute to deep inhalation
segmental muscle group
interspinales and
intertransversarii muscles that bring together the
spinous and transverse processes of each
consecutive vertebra
semimembranosus
hamstring muscle
semispinalis capitis
transversospinales muscle
associated with the head region
semispinalis cervicis
transversospinales muscle
associated with the cervical region
semispinalis thoracis
transversospinales muscle
associated with the thoracic region
semitendinosus
hamstring muscle
serratus anterior
large and flat muscle that
originates on the ribs and inserts onto the scapula
soleus
wide, flat muscle deep to the gastrocnemius
sphincter urethrovaginalis
deep perineal muscle in
females
spinalis capitis
muscle of the spinalis group
associated with the head region
444
11 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
spinalis cervicis
muscle of the spinalis group
associated with the cervical region
spinalis group
medially placed muscles of the
erector spinae
spinalis thoracis
muscle of the spinalis group
associated with the thoracic region
splenius
posterior neck muscles; includes the
splenius capitis and splenius cervicis
splenius capitis
neck muscle that inserts into the
head region
splenius cervicis
neck muscle that inserts into the
cervical region
sternocleidomastoid
major muscle that laterally
flexes and rotates the head
sternohyoid
muscle that depresses the hyoid bone
sternothyroid
muscle that depresses the larynx’s
thyroid cartilage
styloglossus
muscle that originates on the styloid
bone, and allows upward and backward motion of
the tongue
stylohyoid
muscle that elevates the hyoid bone
posteriorly
subclavius
muscle that stabilizes the clavicle during
movement
subscapularis
muscle that originates on the anterior
scapula and medially rotates the arm
superficial anterior compartment of the forearm
flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, flexor carpi
ulnaris, flexor digitorum superficialis, and their
associated blood vessels and nerves
superficial posterior compartment of the forearm
extensor radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis
brevis, extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi,
extensor carpi ulnaris, and their associated blood
vessels and nerves
superior extensor retinaculum
transverse ligament
of the ankle
superior gemellus
muscle deep to the gluteus
maximus on the lateral surface of the thigh that
laterally rotates the femur at the hip
supinator
muscle that moves the palm and forearm
anteriorly
suprahyoid muscles
neck muscles that are superior
to the hyoid bone
supraspinatus
muscle that abducts the arm
synergist
muscle whose contraction helps a prime
mover in an action
temporalis
muscle that retracts the mandible
tendinous intersections
three transverse bands of
collagen fibers that divide the rectus abdominis into
segments
tensor fascia lata
muscle that flexes and abducts the
thigh
teres major
muscle that extends the arm and assists
in adduction and medial rotation of it
teres minor
muscle that laterally rotates and extends
the arm
thenar
group of muscles on the lateral aspect of the
palm
thenar eminence
rounded contour of muscle at the
base of the thumb
thyrohyoid
muscle that depresses the hyoid bone
and elevates the larynx’s thyroid cartilage
tibialis anterior
muscle located on the lateral surface
of the tibia
tibialis posterior
muscle that plantar flexes and
inverts the foot
transversospinales
muscles that originate at the
transverse processes and insert at the spinous
processes of the vertebrae
transversus abdominis
deep layer of the abdomen
that has fascicles arranged transversely around the
abdomen
trapezius
muscle that stabilizes the upper part of the
back
tri
three
triceps brachii
three-headed muscle that extends
the forearm
unipennate
pennate muscle that has fascicles
located on one side of the tendon
urogenital triangle
anterior triangle of the perineum
that includes the external genitals
vastus intermedius
quadricep muscle that is
between the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis
and is deep to the rectus femoris
vastus lateralis
quadricep muscle on the lateral
aspect of the thigh
vastus medialis
quadricep muscle on the medial
aspect of the thigh
Chapter Review
11.1 Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their
Fascicle Arrangement, and Their Lever
Systems
Skeletal muscles each have an origin and an insertion.
The end of the muscle that attaches to the bone being
pulled is called the muscle’s insertion and the end of
the muscle attached to a fixed, or stabilized, bone is
called the origin. The muscle primarily responsible for
a movement is called the prime mover, and muscles
that assist in this action are called synergists. A
synergist that makes the insertion site more stable is
11 • Chapter Review
445
called a fixator. Meanwhile, a muscle with the opposite
action of the prime mover is called an antagonist.
Several factors contribute to the force generated by a
skeletal muscle. One is the arrangement of the
fascicles in the skeletal muscle. Fascicles can be
parallel, circular, convergent, pennate, fusiform, or
triangular. Each arrangement has its own range of
motion and ability to do work.
11.2 Naming Skeletal Muscles
Muscle names are based on many characteristics. The
location of a muscle in the body is important. Some
muscles are named based on their size and location,
such as the gluteal muscles of the buttocks. Other
muscle names can indicate the location in the body or
bones with which the muscle is associated, such as the
tibialis anterior. The shapes of some muscles are
distinctive; for example, the direction of the muscle
fibers is used to describe muscles of the body midline.
The origin and/or insertion can also be features used to
name a muscle; examples are the biceps brachii,
triceps brachii, and the pectoralis major.
11.3 Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and
Back
Muscles are either axial muscles or appendicular. The
axial muscles are grouped based on location, function,
or both. Some axial muscles cross over to the
appendicular skeleton. The muscles of the head and
neck are all axial. The muscles in the face create facial
expression by inserting into the skin rather than onto
bone. Muscles that move the eyeballs are extrinsic,
meaning they originate outside of the eye and insert
onto it. Tongue muscles are both extrinsic and intrinsic.
The genioglossus depresses the tongue and moves it
anteriorly; the styloglossus lifts the tongue and retracts
it; the palatoglossus elevates the back of the tongue;
and the hyoglossus depresses and flattens it. The
muscles of the anterior neck facilitate swallowing and
speech, stabilize the hyoid bone and position the
larynx. The muscles of the neck stabilize and move the
head. The sternocleidomastoid divides the neck into
anterior and posterior triangles.
The muscles of the back and neck that move the
vertebral column are complex, overlapping, and can be
divided into five groups. The splenius group includes
the splenius capitis and the splenius cervicis. The
erector spinae has three subgroups. The iliocostalis
group includes the iliocostalis cervicis, the iliocostalis
thoracis, and the iliocostalis lumborum. The
longissimus group includes the longissimus capitis, the
longissimus cervicis, and the longissimus thoracis. The
spinalis group includes the spinalis capitis, the spinalis
cervicis, and the spinalis thoracis. The
transversospinales include the semispinalis capitis,
semispinalis cervicis, semispinalis thoracis, multifidus,
and rotatores. The segmental muscles include the
interspinales and intertransversarii. Finally, the
scalenes include the anterior scalene, middle scalene,
and posterior scalene.
11.4 Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall,
and Thorax
Made of skin, fascia, and four pairs of muscle, the
anterior abdominal wall protects the organs located in
the abdomen and moves the vertebral column. These
muscles include the rectus abdominis, which extends
through the entire length of the trunk, the external
oblique, the internal oblique, and the transversus
abdominis. The quadratus lumborum forms the
posterior abdominal wall.
The muscles of the thorax play a large role in breathing,
especially the dome-shaped diaphragm. When it
contracts and flattens, the volume inside the pleural
cavities increases, which decreases the pressure within
them. As a result, air will flow into the lungs. The
external and internal intercostal muscles span the
space between the ribs and help change the shape of
the rib cage and the volume-pressure ratio inside the
pleural cavities during inspiration and expiration.
The perineum muscles play roles in urination in both
sexes, ejaculation in males, and vaginal contraction in
females. The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic
organs, resist intra-abdominal pressure, and work as
sphincters for the urethra, rectum, and vagina.
11.5 Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and
Upper Limbs
The clavicle and scapula make up the pectoral girdle,
which provides a stable origin for the muscles that
move the humerus. The muscles that position and
stabilize the pectoral girdle are located on the thorax.
The anterior thoracic muscles are the subclavius,
pectoralis minor, and the serratus anterior. The
posterior thoracic muscles are the trapezius, levator
scapulae, rhomboid major, and rhomboid minor. Nine
muscles cross the shoulder joint to move the humerus.
The ones that originate on the axial skeleton are the
pectoralis major and the latissimus dorsi. The deltoid,
subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres
major, teres minor, and coracobrachialis originate on
the scapula.
The forearm flexors include the biceps brachii,
brachialis, and brachioradialis. The extensors are the
446
11 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
triceps brachii and anconeus. The pronators are the
pronator teres and the pronator quadratus. The
supinator is the only one that turns the forearm
anteriorly.
The extrinsic muscles of the hands originate along the
forearm and insert into the hand in order to facilitate
crude movements of the wrists, hands, and fingers. The
superficial anterior compartment of the forearm
produces flexion. These muscles are the flexor carpi
radialis, palmaris longus, flexor carpi ulnaris, and the
flexor digitorum superficialis. The deep anterior
compartment produces flexion as well. These are the
flexor pollicis longus and the flexor digitorum
profundus. The rest of the compartments produce
extension. The extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor
carpi radialis brevis, extensor digitorum, extensor digiti
minimi, and extensor carpi ulnaris are the muscles
found in the superficial posterior compartment. The
deep posterior compartment includes the abductor
longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor pollicis
longus, and the extensor indicis.
Finally, the intrinsic muscles of the hands allow our
fingers to make precise movements, such as typing and
writing. They both originate and insert within the hand.
The thenar muscles, which are located on the lateral
part of the palm, are the abductor pollicis brevis,
opponens pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, and adductor
pollicis. The hypothenar muscles, which are located on
the medial part of the palm, are the abductor digiti
minimi, flexor digiti minimi brevis, and opponens digiti
minimi. The intermediate muscles, located in the
middle of the palm, are the lumbricals, palmar
interossei, and dorsal interossei.
11.6 Appendicular Muscles of the Pelvic
Girdle and Lower Limbs
The pelvic girdle attaches the legs to the axial skeleton.
The hip joint is where the pelvic girdle and the leg
come together. The hip is joined to the pelvic girdle by
many muscles. In the gluteal region, the psoas major
and iliacus form the iliopsoas. The large and strong
gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and gluteus
minimus extend and abduct the femur. Along with the
gluteus maximus, the tensor fascia lata muscle forms
the iliotibial tract. The lateral rotators of the femur at
the hip are the piriformis, obturator internus, obturator
externus, superior gemellus, inferior gemellus, and
quadratus femoris. On the medial part of the thigh, the
adductor longus, adductor brevis, and adductor
magnus adduct the thigh and medially rotate it. The
pectineus muscle adducts and flexes the femur at the
hip.
The thigh muscles that move the femur, tibia, and
fibula are divided into medial, anterior, and posterior
compartments. The medial compartment includes the
adductors, pectineus, and the gracilis. The anterior
compartment comprises the quadriceps femoris,
quadriceps tendon, patellar ligament, and the
sartorius. The quadriceps femoris is made of four
muscles: the rectus femoris, the vastus lateralis, the
vastus medius, and the vastus intermedius, which
together extend the knee. The posterior compartment
of the thigh includes the hamstrings: the biceps
femoris, semitendinosus, and the semimembranosus,
which all flex the knee.
The muscles of the leg that move the foot and toes are
divided into anterior, lateral, superficial- and deep-
posterior compartments. The anterior compartment
includes the tibialis anterior, the extensor hallucis
longus, the extensor digitorum longus, and the fibularis
(peroneus) tertius. The lateral compartment houses
the fibularis (peroneus) longus and the fibularis
(peroneus) brevis. The superficial posterior
compartment has the gastrocnemius, soleus, and
plantaris; and the deep posterior compartment has the
popliteus, tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus,
and flexor hallucis longus.
Review Questions
1. Which of the following is unique to the muscles of
facial expression?
a.
They all originate from the scalp musculature.
b.
They insert onto the cartilage found around the
face.
c.
They only insert onto the facial bones.
d.
They insert into the skin.
2. Which of the following helps an agonist work?
a.
a synergist
b.
a fixator
c.
an insertion
d.
an antagonist
11 • Review Questions
447
3. Which of the following statements is correct about
what happens during flexion?
a.
The angle between bones is increased.
b.
The angle between bones is decreased.
c.
The bone moves away from the body.
d.
The bone moves toward the center of the body.
4. Which is moved the least during muscle
contraction?
a.
the origin
b.
the insertion
c.
the ligaments
d.
the joints
5. Which muscle has a convergent pattern of
fascicles?
a.
biceps brachii
b.
gluteus maximus
c.
pectoralis major
d.
rectus femoris
6. A muscle that has a pattern of fascicles running
along the long axis of the muscle has which of the
following fascicle arrangements?
a.
circular
b.
pennate
c.
parallel
d.
rectus
7. Which arrangement best describes a bipennate
muscle?
a.
The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long
tendon from both sides.
b.
The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long
tendon from all directions.
c.
The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long
tendon from one side.
d.
The muscle fibers on one side of a tendon feed
into it at a certain angle and muscle fibers on
the other side of the tendon feed into it at the
opposite angle.
8. The location of a muscle’s insertion and origin can
determine ________.
a.
action
b.
the force of contraction
c.
muscle name
d.
the load a muscle can carry
9. Where is the temporalis muscle located?
a.
on the forehead
b.
in the neck
c.
on the side of the head
d.
on the chin
10. Which muscle name does not make sense?
a.
extensor digitorum
b.
gluteus minimus
c.
biceps femoris
d.
extensor minimus longus
11. Which of the following terms would be used in the
name of a muscle that moves the leg away from
the body?
a.
flexor
b.
adductor
c.
extensor
d.
abductor
12. Which of the following is a prime mover in head
flexion?
a.
occipitofrontalis
b.
corrugator supercilii
c.
sternocleidomastoid
d.
masseter
13. Where is the inferior oblique muscle located?
a.
in the abdomen
b.
in the eye socket
c.
in the anterior neck
d.
in the face
14. What is the action of the masseter?
a.
swallowing
b.
chewing
c.
moving the lips
d.
closing the eye
15. The names of the extrinsic tongue muscles
commonly end in ________.
a.
-glottis
b.
-glossus
c.
-gluteus
d.
-hyoid
16. What is the function of the erector spinae?
a.
movement of the arms
b.
stabilization of the pelvic girdle
c.
postural support
d.
rotating of the vertebral column
17. Which of the following abdominal muscles is not a
part of the anterior abdominal wall?
a.
quadratus lumborum
b.
rectus abdominis
c.
interior oblique
d.
exterior oblique
448
11 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
18. Which muscle pair plays a role in respiration?
a.
intertransversarii, interspinales
b.
semispinalis cervicis, semispinalis thoracis
c.
trapezius, rhomboids
d.
diaphragm, scalene
19. What is the linea alba?
a.
a small muscle that helps with compression
of the abdominal organs
b.
a long tendon that runs down the middle of
the rectus abdominis
c.
a long band of collagen fibers that connects
the hip to the knee
d.
another name for the tendinous inscription
20. The rhomboid major and minor muscles are deep
to the ________.
a.
rectus abdominis
b.
scalene muscles
c.
trapezius
d.
ligamentum nuchae
21. Which muscle extends the forearm?
a.
biceps brachii
b.
triceps brachii
c.
brachialis
d.
deltoid
22. What is the origin of the wrist flexors?
a.
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus
b.
the medial epicondyle of the humerus
c.
the carpal bones of the wrist
d.
the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus
23. Which muscles stabilize the pectoral girdle?
a.
axial and scapular
b.
axial
c.
appendicular
d.
axial and appendicular
24. The large muscle group that attaches the leg to
the pelvic girdle and produces extension of the hip
joint is the ________ group.
a.
gluteal
b.
obturator
c.
adductor
d.
abductor
25. Which muscle produces movement that allows
you to cross your legs?
a.
the gluteus maximus
b.
the piriformis
c.
the gracilis
d.
the sartorius
26. What is the largest muscle in the lower leg?
a.
soleus
b.
gastrocnemius
c.
tibialis anterior
d.
tibialis posterior
27. The vastus intermedius muscle is deep to which of
the following muscles?
a.
biceps femoris
b.
rectus femoris
c.
vastus medialis
d.
vastus lateralis
Critical Thinking Questions
28. What effect does fascicle arrangement have on a
muscle’s action?
29. Movements of the body occur at joints. Describe
how muscles are arranged around the joints of the
body.
30. Explain how a synergist assists an agonist by being
a fixator.
31. Describe the different criteria that contribute to
how skeletal muscles are named.
32. Explain the difference between axial and
appendicular muscles.
33. Describe the muscles of the anterior neck.
34. Why are the muscles of the face different from
typical skeletal muscle?
35. Describe the fascicle arrangement in the muscles
of the abdominal wall. How do they relate to each
other?
36. What are some similarities and differences
between the diaphragm and the pelvic
diaphragm?
37. The tendons of which muscles form the rotator
cuff? Why is the rotator cuff important?
38. List the general muscle groups of the shoulders
and upper limbs as well as their subgroups.
39. Which muscles form the hamstrings? How do they
function together?
40. Which muscles form the quadriceps? How do they
function together?
11 • Critical Thinking Questions
449
450
11 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 12
The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Name the major divisions of the nervous system, both anatomical and functional
•
Describe the functional and structural differences between gray matter and white matter structures
•
Name the parts of the multipolar neuron in order of polarity
•
List the types of glial cells and assign each to the proper division of the nervous system, along with their
function(s)
•
Distinguish the major functions of the nervous system: sensation, integration, and response
•
Describe the components of the membrane that establish the resting membrane potential
•
Describe the changes that occur to the membrane that result in the action potential
•
Explain the differences between types of graded potentials
•
Categorize the major neurotransmitters by chemical type and effect
The nervous system is a very complex organ system. In Peter D. Kramer’s book Listening to
Prozac, a pharmaceutical researcher is quoted as saying, “If the human brain were simple enough for us to
understand, we would be too simple to understand it” (1994). That quote is from the early 1990s; in the two
decades since, progress has continued at an amazing rate within the scientific disciplines of neuroscience. It is an
interesting conundrum to consider that the complexity of the nervous system may be too complex for it (that is, for
us) to completely unravel. But our current level of understanding is probably nowhere close to that limit.
One easy way to begin to understand the structure of the nervous system is to start with the large divisions and work
through to a more in-depth understanding. In other chapters, the finer details of the nervous system will be
explained, but first looking at an overview of the system will allow you to begin to understand how its parts work
together. The focus of this chapter is on nervous (neural) tissue, both its structure and its function. But before you
learn about that, you will see a big picture of the system—actually, a few big pictures.
Figure 12.1
Robotic Arms Playing Foosball As the neural circuitry of the nervous system has become more fully understood and
robotics more sophisticated, it is now possible to integrate technology with the body and restore abilities following traumatic events. At
some point in the future, will this type of technology lead to the ability to augment our nervous systems? (credit: U.S. Army/Wikimedia
Commons)
12.1 Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the anatomical and functional divisions of the nervous system
•
Relate the functional and structural differences between gray matter and white matter structures of the nervous
system to the structure of neurons
•
List the basic functions of the nervous system
The picture you have in your mind of the nervous system probably includes the brain, the nervous tissue contained
within the cranium, and the spinal cord, the extension of nervous tissue within the vertebral column. That suggests
it is made of two organs—and you may not even think of the spinal cord as an organ—but the nervous system is a
very complex structure. Within the brain, many different and separate regions are responsible for many different and
separate functions. It is as if the nervous system is composed of many organs that all look similar and can only be
differentiated using tools such as the microscope or electrophysiology. In comparison, it is easy to see that the
stomach is different than the esophagus or the liver, so you can imagine the digestive system as a collection of
specific organs.
The Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems
The nervous system can be divided into two major regions: the central and peripheral nervous systems. The central
nervous system (CNS) is the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) is everything else
(Figure 12.2). The brain is contained within the cranial cavity of the skull, and the spinal cord is contained within the
vertebral cavity of the vertebral column. It is a bit of an oversimplification to say that the CNS is what is inside these
two cavities and the peripheral nervous system is outside of them, but that is one way to start to think about it. In
actuality, there are some elements of the peripheral nervous system that are within the cranial or vertebral cavities.
The peripheral nervous system is so named because it is on the periphery—meaning beyond the brain and spinal
cord. Depending on different aspects of the nervous system, the dividing line between central and peripheral is not
necessarily universal.
FIGURE 12.2
Central and Peripheral Nervous System
The structures of the PNS are referred to as ganglia and nerves, which can be
seen as distinct structures. The equivalent structures in the CNS are not obvious from this overall perspective and are best examined in
prepared tissue under the microscope.
Nervous tissue, present in both the CNS and PNS, contains two basic types of cells: neurons and glial cells. A glial
cell is one of a variety of cells that provide a framework of tissue that supports the neurons and their activities. The
452
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
neuron is the more functionally important of the two, in terms of the communicative function of the nervous system.
To describe the functional divisions of the nervous system, it is important to understand the structure of a neuron.
Neurons are cells and therefore have a soma, or cell body, but they also have extensions of the cell; each extension
is generally referred to as a process. There is one important process that every neuron has called an axon, which is
the fiber that connects a neuron with its target. Another type of process that branches off from the soma is the
dendrite. Dendrites are responsible for receiving most of the input from other neurons. Looking at nervous tissue,
there are regions that predominantly contain cell bodies and regions that are largely composed of just axons. These
two regions within nervous system structures are often referred to as gray matter (the regions with many cell
bodies and dendrites) or white matter (the regions with many axons). Figure 12.3 demonstrates the appearance of
these regions in the brain and spinal cord. The colors ascribed to these regions are what would be seen in “fresh,” or
unstained, nervous tissue. Gray matter is not necessarily gray. It can be pinkish because of blood content, or even
slightly tan, depending on how long the tissue has been preserved. But white matter is white because axons are
insulated by a lipid-rich substance called myelin. Lipids can appear as white (“fatty”) material, much like the fat on
a raw piece of chicken or beef. Actually, gray matter may have that color ascribed to it because next to the white
matter, it is just darker—hence, gray.
The distinction between gray matter and white matter is most often applied to central nervous tissue, which has
large regions that can be seen with the unaided eye. When looking at peripheral structures, often a microscope is
used and the tissue is stained with artificial colors. That is not to say that central nervous tissue cannot be stained
and viewed under a microscope, but unstained tissue is most likely from the CNS—for example, a frontal section of
the brain or cross section of the spinal cord.
FIGURE 12.3
Gray Matter and White Matter
A brain removed during an autopsy, with a partial section removed, shows white matter
surrounded by gray matter. Gray matter makes up the outer cortex of the brain. (credit: modification of work by “Suseno”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Regardless of the appearance of stained or unstained tissue, the cell bodies of neurons or axons can be located in
discrete anatomical structures that need to be named. Those names are specific to whether the structure is central
or peripheral. A localized collection of neuron cell bodies in the CNS is referred to as a nucleus. In the PNS, a cluster
of neuron cell bodies is referred to as a ganglion. Figure 12.4 indicates how the term nucleus has a few different
meanings within anatomy and physiology. It is the center of an atom, where protons and neutrons are found; it is the
center of a cell, where the DNA is found; and it is a center of some function in the CNS. There is also a potentially
confusing use of the word ganglion (plural = ganglia) that has a historical explanation. In the central nervous system,
there is a group of nuclei that are connected together and were once called the basal ganglia before “ganglion”
became accepted as a description for a peripheral structure. Some sources refer to this group of nuclei as the “basal
nuclei” to avoid confusion.
12.1 • Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
453
FIGURE 12.4
What Is a Nucleus?
(a) The nucleus of an atom contains its protons and neutrons. (b) The nucleus of a cell is the
organelle that contains DNA. (c) A nucleus in the CNS is a localized center of function with the cell bodies of several neurons, shown here
circled in red. (credit c: “Was a bee”/Wikimedia Commons)
Terminology applied to bundles of axons also differs depending on location. A bundle of axons, or fibers, found in
the CNS is called a tract whereas the same thing in the PNS would be called a nerve. There is an important point to
make about these terms, which is that they can both be used to refer to the same bundle of axons. When those
axons are in the PNS, the term is nerve, but if they are CNS, the term is tract. The most obvious example of this is the
axons that project from the retina into the brain. Those axons are called the optic nerve as they leave the eye, but
when they are inside the cranium, they are referred to as the optic tract. There is a specific place where the name
changes, which is the optic chiasm, but they are still the same axons (Figure 12.5). A similar situation outside of
science can be described for some roads. Imagine a road called “Broad Street” in a town called “Anyville.” The road
leaves Anyville and goes to the next town over, called “Hometown.” When the road crosses the line between the two
towns and is in Hometown, its name changes to “Main Street.” That is the idea behind the naming of the retinal
axons. In the PNS, they are called the optic nerve, and in the CNS, they are the optic tract. Table 12.1 helps to clarify
which of these terms apply to the central or peripheral nervous systems.
FIGURE 12.5
Optic Nerve Versus Optic Tract
This drawing of the connections of the eye to the brain shows the optic nerve extending
from the eye to the chiasm, where the structure continues as the optic tract. The same axons extend from the eye to the brain through
these two bundles of fibers, but the chiasm represents the border between peripheral and central.
INTERACTIVE LINK
In 2003, the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Paul C. Lauterbur and Sir Peter Mansfield for
discoveries related to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This is a tool to see the structures of the body (not just the
nervous system) that depends on magnetic fields associated with certain atomic nuclei. The utility of this technique
454
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
in the nervous system is that fat tissue and water appear as different shades between black and white. Because
white matter is fatty (from myelin) and gray matter is not, they can be easily distinguished in MRI images. Try this
PhET simulation (http://openstax.org/l/nobel_2) that demonstrates the use of this technology and compares it with
other types of imaging technologies. Also, the results from an MRI session are compared with images obtained from
X-ray or computed tomography. How do the imaging techniques shown in this game indicate the separation of white
and gray matter compared with the freshly dissected tissue shown earlier?
Structures of the CNS and PNS
CNS
PNS
Group of Neuron Cell Bodies (i.e., gray matter)
Nucleus
Ganglion
Bundle of Axons (i.e., white matter)
Tract
Nerve
TABLE 12.1
Functional Divisions of the Nervous System
The nervous system can also be divided on the basis of its functions, but anatomical divisions and functional
divisions are different. The CNS and the PNS both contribute to the same functions, but those functions can be
attributed to different regions of the brain (such as the cerebral cortex or the hypothalamus) or to different ganglia in
the periphery. The problem with trying to fit functional differences into anatomical divisions is that sometimes the
same structure can be part of several functions. For example, the optic nerve carries signals from the retina that are
either used for the conscious perception of visual stimuli, which takes place in the cerebral cortex, or for the
reflexive responses of smooth muscle tissue that are processed through the hypothalamus.
There are two ways to consider how the nervous system is divided functionally. First, the basic functions of the
nervous system are sensation, integration, and response. Secondly, control of the body can be somatic or
autonomic—divisions that are largely defined by the structures that are involved in the response. There is also a
region of the peripheral nervous system that is called the enteric nervous system that is responsible for a specific
set of the functions within the realm of autonomic control related to gastrointestinal functions.
Basic Functions
The nervous system is involved in receiving information about the environment around us (sensation) and
generating responses to that information (motor responses). The nervous system can be divided into regions that
are responsible for sensation (sensory functions) and for the response (motor functions). But there is a third
function that needs to be included. Sensory input needs to be integrated with other sensations, as well as with
memories, emotional state, or learning (cognition). Some regions of the nervous system are termed integration or
association areas. The process of integration combines sensory perceptions and higher cognitive functions such as
memories, learning, and emotion to produce a response.
Sensation. The first major function of the nervous system is sensation—receiving information about the environment
to gain input about what is happening outside the body (or, sometimes, within the body). The sensory functions of
the nervous system register the presence of a change from homeostasis or a particular event in the environment,
known as a stimulus. The senses we think of most are the “big five”: taste, smell, touch, sight, and hearing. The
stimuli for taste and smell are both chemical substances (molecules, compounds, ions, etc.), touch is physical or
mechanical stimuli that interact with the skin, sight is light stimuli, and hearing is the perception of sound, which is a
physical stimulus similar to some aspects of touch. There are actually more senses than just those, but that list
represents the major senses. Those five are all senses that receive stimuli from the outside world, and of which
there is conscious perception. Additional sensory stimuli might be from the internal environment (inside the body),
such as the stretch of an organ wall or the concentration of certain ions in the blood.
Response. The nervous system produces a response on the basis of the stimuli perceived by sensory structures. An
obvious response would be the movement of muscles, such as withdrawing a hand from a hot stove, but there are
12.1 • Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
455
broader uses of the term. The nervous system can cause the contraction of all three types of muscle tissue. For
example, skeletal muscle contracts to move the skeleton, cardiac muscle is influenced as heart rate increases
during exercise, and smooth muscle contracts as the digestive system moves food along the digestive tract.
Responses also include the neural control of glands in the body as well, such as the production and secretion of
sweat by the eccrine and merocrine sweat glands found in the skin to lower body temperature.
Responses can be divided into those that are voluntary or conscious (contraction of skeletal muscle) and those that
are involuntary (contraction of smooth muscles, regulation of cardiac muscle, activation of glands). Voluntary
responses are governed by the somatic nervous system and involuntary responses are governed by the autonomic
nervous system, which are discussed in the next section.
Integration. Stimuli that are received by sensory structures are communicated to the nervous system where that
information is processed. This is called integration. Stimuli are compared with, or integrated with, other stimuli,
memories of previous stimuli, or the state of a person at a particular time. This leads to the specific response that
will be generated. Seeing a baseball pitched to a batter will not automatically cause the batter to swing. The
trajectory of the ball and its speed will need to be considered. Maybe the count is three balls and one strike, and the
batter wants to let this pitch go by in the hope of getting a walk to first base. Or maybe the batter’s team is so far
ahead, it would be fun to just swing away.
Controlling the Body
The nervous system can be divided into two parts mostly on the basis of a functional difference in responses. The
somatic nervous system (SNS) is responsible for conscious perception and voluntary motor responses. Voluntary
motor response means the contraction of skeletal muscle, but those contractions are not always voluntary in the
sense that you have to want to perform them. Some somatic motor responses are reflexes, and often happen
without a conscious decision to perform them. If your friend jumps out from behind a corner and yells “Boo!” you
will be startled and you might scream or leap back. You didn’t decide to do that, and you may not have wanted to
give your friend a reason to laugh at your expense, but it is a reflex involving skeletal muscle contractions. Other
motor responses become automatic (in other words, unconscious) as a person learns motor skills (referred to as
“habit learning” or “procedural memory”).
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is responsible for involuntary control of the body, usually for the sake of
homeostasis (regulation of the internal environment). Sensory input for autonomic functions can be from sensory
structures tuned to external or internal environmental stimuli. The motor output extends to smooth and cardiac
muscle as well as glandular tissue. The role of the autonomic system is to regulate the organ systems of the body,
which usually means to control homeostasis. Sweat glands, for example, are controlled by the autonomic system.
When you are hot, sweating helps cool your body down. That is a homeostatic mechanism. But when you are
nervous, you might start sweating also. That is not homeostatic, it is the physiological response to an emotional
state.
There is another division of the nervous system that describes functional responses. The enteric nervous system
(ENS) is responsible for controlling the smooth muscle and glandular tissue in your digestive system. It is a large
part of the PNS, and is not dependent on the CNS. It is sometimes valid, however, to consider the enteric system to
be a part of the autonomic system because the neural structures that make up the enteric system are a component
of the autonomic output that regulates digestion. There are some differences between the two, but for our purposes
here there will be a good bit of overlap. See Figure 12.6 for examples of where these divisions of the nervous system
can be found.
456
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.6
Somatic, Autonomic, and Enteric Structures of the Nervous System
Somatic structures include the spinal nerves, both
motor and sensory fibers, as well as the sensory ganglia (posterior root ganglia and cranial nerve ganglia). Autonomic structures are found
in the nerves also, but include the sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia. The enteric nervous system includes the nervous tissue within
the organs of the digestive tract.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/troublewstairs) to read about a woman that notices that her daughter is having
trouble walking up the stairs. This leads to the discovery of a hereditary condition that affects the brain and spinal
cord. The electromyography and MRI tests indicated deficiencies in the spinal cord and cerebellum, both of which
are responsible for controlling coordinated movements. To what functional division of the nervous system would
these structures belong?
Everyday Connection
How Much of Your Brain Do You Use?
Have you ever heard the claim that humans only use 10 percent of their brains? Maybe you have seen an
advertisement on a website saying that there is a secret to unlocking the full potential of your mind—as if there
were 90 percent of your brain sitting idle, just waiting for you to use it. If you see an ad like that, don’t click. It
isn’t true.
An easy way to see how much of the brain a person uses is to take measurements of brain activity while
performing a task. An example of this kind of measurement is functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
which generates a map of the most active areas and can be generated and presented in three dimensions
(Figure 12.7). This procedure is different from the standard MRI technique because it is measuring changes in
the tissue in time with an experimental condition or event.
12.1 • Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
457
12.2 Nervous Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the basic structure of a neuron
•
Identify the different types of neurons on the basis of polarity
•
List the glial cells of the CNS and describe their function
•
List the glial cells of the PNS and describe their function
Nervous tissue is composed of two types of cells, neurons and glial cells. Neurons are the primary type of cell that
most anyone associates with the nervous system. They are responsible for the computation and communication
that the nervous system provides. They are electrically active and release chemical signals to target cells. Glial cells,
or glia, are known to play a supporting role for nervous tissue. Ongoing research pursues an expanded role that glial
cells might play in signaling, but neurons are still considered the basis of this function. Neurons are important, but
without glial support they would not be able to perform their function.
FIGURE 12.7
fMRI
This fMRI shows activation of the visual cortex in response to visual stimuli. (credit: “Superborsuk”/Wikimedia
Commons)
The underlying assumption is that active nervous tissue will have greater blood flow. By having the subject
perform a visual task, activity all over the brain can be measured. Consider this possible experiment: the subject
is told to look at a screen with a black dot in the middle (a fixation point). A photograph of a face is projected on
the screen away from the center. The subject has to look at the photograph and decipher what it is. The subject
has been instructed to push a button if the photograph is of someone they recognize. The photograph might be
of a celebrity, so the subject would press the button, or it might be of a random person unknown to the subject,
so the subject would not press the button.
In this task, visual sensory areas would be active, integrating areas would be active, motor areas responsible for
moving the eyes would be active, and motor areas for pressing the button with a finger would be active. Those
areas are distributed all around the brain and the fMRI images would show activity in more than just 10 percent
of the brain (some evidence suggests that about 80 percent of the brain is using energy—based on blood flow to
the tissue—during well-defined tasks similar to the one suggested above). This task does not even include all of
the functions the brain performs. There is no language response, the body is mostly lying still in the MRI
machine, and it does not consider the autonomic functions that would be ongoing in the background.
458
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
Neurons
Neurons are the cells considered to be the basis of nervous tissue. They are responsible for the electrical signals
that communicate information about sensations, and that produce movements in response to those stimuli, along
with inducing thought processes within the brain. An important part of the function of neurons is in their structure,
or shape. The three-dimensional shape of these cells makes the immense numbers of connections within the
nervous system possible.
Parts of a Neuron
As you learned in the first section, the main part of a neuron is the cell body, which is also known as the soma (soma
= “body”). The cell body contains the nucleus and most of the major organelles. But what makes neurons special is
that they have many extensions of their cell membranes, which are generally referred to as processes. Neurons are
usually described as having one, and only one, axon—a fiber that emerges from the cell body and projects to target
cells. That single axon can branch repeatedly to communicate with many target cells. It is the axon that propagates
the nerve impulse, which is communicated to one or more cells. The other processes of the neuron are dendrites,
which receive information from other neurons at specialized areas of contact called synapses. The dendrites are
usually highly branched processes, providing locations for other neurons to communicate with the cell body.
Information flows through a neuron from the dendrites, across the cell body, and down the axon. This gives the
neuron a polarity—meaning that information flows in this one direction. Figure 12.8 shows the relationship of these
parts to one another.
FIGURE 12.8
Parts of a Neuron
The major parts of the neuron are labeled on a multipolar neuron from the CNS.
Where the axon emerges from the cell body, there is a special region referred to as the axon hillock. This is a
tapering of the cell body toward the axon fiber. Within the axon hillock, the cytoplasm changes to a solution of
limited components called axoplasm. Because the axon hillock represents the beginning of the axon, it is also
referred to as the initial segment.
Many axons are wrapped by an insulating substance called myelin, which is actually made from glial cells. Myelin
acts as insulation much like the plastic or rubber that is used to insulate electrical wires. A key difference between
myelin and the insulation on a wire is that there are gaps in the myelin covering of an axon. Each gap is called a node
of Ranvier and is important to the way that electrical signals travel down the axon. The length of the axon between
each gap, which is wrapped in myelin, is referred to as an axon segment. At the end of the axon is the axon
terminal, where there are usually several branches extending toward the target cell, each of which ends in an
enlargement called a synaptic end bulb. These bulbs are what make the connection with the target cell at the
synapse.
Types of Neurons
There are many neurons in the nervous system—a number in the trillions. And there are many different types of
neurons. They can be classified by many different criteria. The first way to classify them is by the number of
processes attached to the cell body. Using the standard model of neurons, one of these processes is the axon, and
12.2 • Nervous Tissue
459
the rest are dendrites. Because information flows through the neuron from dendrites or cell bodies toward the axon,
these names are based on the neuron's polarity (Figure 12.9).
FIGURE 12.9
Neuron Classification by Shape
Unipolar cells have one process that includes both the axon and dendrite. Bipolar cells
have two processes, the axon and a dendrite. Multipolar cells have more than two processes, the axon and two or more dendrites.
Unipolar cells have only one process emerging from the cell. True unipolar cells are only found in invertebrate
animals, so the unipolar cells in humans are more appropriately called “pseudo-unipolar” cells. Invertebrate
unipolar cells do not have dendrites. Human unipolar cells have an axon that emerges from the cell body, but it splits
so that the axon can extend along a very long distance. At one end of the axon are dendrites, and at the other end,
the axon forms synaptic connections with a target. Unipolar cells are exclusively sensory neurons and have two
unique characteristics. First, their dendrites are receiving sensory information, sometimes directly from the stimulus
itself. Secondly, the cell bodies of unipolar neurons are always found in ganglia. Sensory reception is a peripheral
function (those dendrites are in the periphery, perhaps in the skin) so the cell body is in the periphery, though closer
to the CNS in a ganglion. The axon projects from the dendrite endings, past the cell body in a ganglion, and into the
central nervous system.
Bipolar cells have two processes, which extend from each end of the cell body, opposite to each other. One is the
axon and one the dendrite. Bipolar cells are not very common. They are found mainly in the olfactory epithelium
(where smell stimuli are sensed), and as part of the retina.
Multipolar neurons are all of the neurons that are not unipolar or bipolar. They have one axon and two or more
dendrites (usually many more). With the exception of the unipolar sensory ganglion cells, and the two specific
bipolar cells mentioned above, all other neurons are multipolar. Some cutting edge research suggests that certain
neurons in the CNS do not conform to the standard model of “one, and only one” axon. Some sources describe a
fourth type of neuron, called an anaxonic neuron. The name suggests that it has no axon (an- = “without”), but this
is not accurate. Anaxonic neurons are very small, and if you look through a microscope at the standard resolution
used in histology (approximately 400X to 1000X total magnification), you will not be able to distinguish any process
specifically as an axon or a dendrite. Any of those processes can function as an axon depending on the conditions at
any given time. Nevertheless, even if they cannot be easily seen, and one specific process is definitively the axon,
these neurons have multiple processes and are therefore multipolar.
Neurons can also be classified on the basis of where they are found, who found them, what they do, or even what
chemicals they use to communicate with each other. Some neurons referred to in this section on the nervous system
are named on the basis of those sorts of classifications (Figure 12.10). For example, a multipolar neuron that has a
very important role to play in a part of the brain called the cerebellum is known as a Purkinje (commonly
pronounced per-KIN-gee) cell. It is named after the anatomist who discovered it (Jan Evangelista Purkinje,
1787–1869).
460
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.10
Other Neuron Classifications
Three examples of neurons that are classified on the basis of other criteria. (a) The
pyramidal cell is a multipolar cell with a cell body that is shaped something like a pyramid. (b) The Purkinje cell in the cerebellum was
named after the scientist who originally described it. (c) Olfactory neurons are named for the functional group with which they belong.
Glial Cells
Glial cells, or neuroglia or simply glia, are the other type of cell found in nervous tissue. They are considered to be
supporting cells, and many functions are directed at helping neurons complete their function for communication.
The name glia comes from the Greek word that means “glue,” and was coined by the German pathologist Rudolph
Virchow, who wrote in 1856: “This connective substance, which is in the brain, the spinal cord, and the special
sense nerves, is a kind of glue (neuroglia) in which the nervous elements are planted.” Today, research into nervous
tissue has shown that there are many deeper roles that these cells play. And research may find much more about
them in the future.
There are six types of glial cells. Four of them are found in the CNS and two are found in the PNS. Table 12.2 outlines
some common characteristics and functions.
Glial Cell Types by Location and Basic Function
CNS glia
PNS glia
Basic function
Astrocyte
Satellite cell
Support
Oligodendrocyte
Schwann cell
Insulation, myelination
Microglia
-
Immune surveillance and phagocytosis
Ependymal cell
-
Creating CSF
TABLE 12.2
Glial Cells of the CNS
One cell providing support to neurons of the CNS is the astrocyte, so named because it appears to be star-shaped
under the microscope (astro- = “star”). Astrocytes have many processes extending from their main cell body (not
axons or dendrites like neurons, just cell extensions). Those processes extend to interact with neurons, blood
vessels, or the connective tissue covering the CNS that is called the pia mater (Figure 12.11). Generally, they are
supporting cells for the neurons in the central nervous system. Some ways in which they support neurons in the
central nervous system are by maintaining the concentration of chemicals in the extracellular space, removing
12.2 • Nervous Tissue
461
excess signaling molecules, reacting to tissue damage, and contributing to the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The
blood-brain barrier is a physiological barrier that keeps many substances that circulate in the rest of the body from
getting into the central nervous system, restricting what can cross from circulating blood into the CNS. Nutrient
molecules, such as glucose or amino acids, can pass through the BBB, but other molecules cannot. This actually
causes problems with drug delivery to the CNS. Pharmaceutical companies are challenged to design drugs that can
cross the BBB as well as have an effect on the nervous system.
FIGURE 12.11
Glial Cells of the CNS
The CNS has astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells that support the
neurons of the CNS in several ways.
Like a few other parts of the body, the brain has a privileged blood supply. Very little can pass through by diffusion.
Most substances that cross the wall of a blood vessel into the CNS must do so through an active transport process.
Because of this, only specific types of molecules can enter the CNS. Glucose—the primary energy source—is
allowed, as are amino acids. Water and some other small particles, like gases and ions, can enter. But most
everything else cannot, including white blood cells, which are one of the body’s main lines of defense. While this
barrier protects the CNS from exposure to toxic or pathogenic substances, it also keeps out the cells that could
protect the brain and spinal cord from disease and damage. The BBB also makes it harder for pharmaceuticals to be
developed that can affect the nervous system. Aside from finding efficacious substances, the means of delivery is
also crucial.
Also found in CNS tissue is the oligodendrocyte, sometimes called just “oligo,” which is the glial cell type that
insulates axons in the CNS. The name means “cell of a few branches” (oligo- = “few”; dendro- = “branches”; -cyte =
“cell”). There are a few processes that extend from the cell body. Each one reaches out and surrounds an axon to
insulate it in myelin. One oligodendrocyte will provide the myelin for multiple axon segments, either for the same
axon or for separate axons. The function of myelin will be discussed below.
Microglia are, as the name implies, smaller than most of the other glial cells. Ongoing research into these cells,
although not entirely conclusive, suggests that they may originate as white blood cells, called macrophages, that
become part of the CNS during early development. While their origin is not conclusively determined, their function is
related to what macrophages do in the rest of the body. When macrophages encounter diseased or damaged cells in
the rest of the body, they ingest and digest those cells or the pathogens that cause disease. Microglia are the cells in
the CNS that can do this in normal, healthy tissue, and they are therefore also referred to as CNS-resident
macrophages.
The ependymal cell is a glial cell that filters blood to make cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), the fluid that circulates
through the CNS. Because of the privileged blood supply inherent in the BBB, the extracellular space in nervous
tissue does not easily exchange components with the blood. Ependymal cells line each ventricle, one of four central
462
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
cavities that are remnants of the hollow center of the neural tube formed during the embryonic development of the
brain. The choroid plexus is a specialized structure in the ventricles where ependymal cells come in contact with
blood vessels and filter and absorb components of the blood to produce cerebrospinal fluid. Because of this,
ependymal cells can be considered a component of the BBB, or a place where the BBB breaks down. These glial
cells appear similar to epithelial cells, making a single layer of cells with little intracellular space and tight
connections between adjacent cells. They also have cilia on their apical surface to help move the CSF through the
ventricular space. The relationship of these glial cells to the structure of the CNS is seen in Figure 12.11.
Glial Cells of the PNS
One of the two types of glial cells found in the PNS is the satellite cell. Satellite cells are found in sensory and
autonomic ganglia, where they surround the cell bodies of neurons. This accounts for the name, based on their
appearance under the microscope. They provide support, performing similar functions in the periphery as astrocytes
do in the CNS—except, of course, for establishing the BBB.
The second type of glial cell is the Schwann cell, which insulate axons with myelin in the periphery. Schwann cells
are different than oligodendrocytes, in that a Schwann cell wraps around a portion of only one axon segment and no
others. Oligodendrocytes have processes that reach out to multiple axon segments, whereas the entire Schwann
cell surrounds just one axon segment. The nucleus and cytoplasm of the Schwann cell are on the edge of the myelin
sheath. The relationship of these two types of glial cells to ganglia and nerves in the PNS is seen in Figure 12.12.
FIGURE 12.12
Glial Cells of the PNS
The PNS has satellite cells and Schwann cells.
Myelin
The insulation for axons in the nervous system is provided by glial cells, oligodendrocytes in the CNS, and Schwann
cells in the PNS. Whereas the manner in which either cell is associated with the axon segment, or segments, that it
insulates is different, the means of myelinating an axon segment is mostly the same in the two situations. Myelin is a
lipid-rich sheath that surrounds the axon and by doing so creates a myelin sheath that facilitates the transmission
of electrical signals along the axon. The lipids are essentially the phospholipids of the glial cell membrane. Myelin,
however, is more than just the membrane of the glial cell. It also includes important proteins that are integral to that
membrane. Some of the proteins help to hold the layers of the glial cell membrane closely together.
The appearance of the myelin sheath can be thought of as similar to the pastry wrapped around a hot dog for “pigs
in a blanket” or a similar food. The glial cell is wrapped around the axon several times with little to no cytoplasm
between the glial cell layers. For oligodendrocytes, the rest of the cell is separate from the myelin sheath as a cell
process extends back toward the cell body. A few other processes provide the same insulation for other axon
segments in the area. For Schwann cells, the outermost layer of the cell membrane contains cytoplasm and the
nucleus of the cell as a bulge on one side of the myelin sheath. During development, the glial cell is loosely or
incompletely wrapped around the axon (Figure 12.13a). The edges of this loose enclosure extend toward each
other, and one end tucks under the other. The inner edge wraps around the axon, creating several layers, and the
other edge closes around the outside so that the axon is completely enclosed.
12.2 • Nervous Tissue
463
Myelin sheaths can extend for one or two millimeters, depending on the diameter of the axon. Axon diameters can
be as small as 1 to 20 micrometers. Because a micrometer is 1/1000 of a millimeter, this means that the length of a
myelin sheath can be 100–1000 times the diameter of the axon. Figure 12.8, Figure 12.11, and Figure 12.12 show
the myelin sheath surrounding an axon segment, but are not to scale. If the myelin sheath were drawn to scale, the
neuron would have to be immense—possibly covering an entire wall of the room in which you are sitting.
FIGURE 12.13
The Process of Myelination
Myelinating glia wrap several layers of cell membrane around the cell membrane of an axon
segment. A single Schwann cell insulates a segment of a peripheral nerve, whereas in the CNS, an oligodendrocyte may provide insulation
for a few separate axon segments. EM × 1,460,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Nervous Tissue
Several diseases can result from the demyelination of axons. The causes of these diseases are not the same;
some have genetic causes, some are caused by pathogens, and others are the result of autoimmune disorders.
Though the causes are varied, the results are largely similar. The myelin insulation of axons is compromised,
464
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 The Function of Nervous Tissue
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the major functions of the nervous system: sensation, integration, and response
•
List the sequence of events in a simple sensory receptor–motor response pathway
Having looked at the components of nervous tissue, and the basic anatomy of the nervous system, next comes an
understanding of how nervous tissue is capable of communicating within the nervous system. Before getting to the
nuts and bolts of how this works, an illustration of how the components come together will be helpful. An example is
summarized in Figure 12.14.
FIGURE 12.14
Testing the Water
(1) The sensory neuron has endings in the skin that sense a stimulus such as water temperature. The
strength of the signal that starts here is dependent on the strength of the stimulus. (2) The graded potential from the sensory endings, if
strong enough, will initiate an action potential at the initial segment of the axon (which is immediately adjacent to the sensory endings in
the skin). (3) The axon of the peripheral sensory neuron enters the spinal cord and contacts another neuron in the gray matter. The contact
is a synapse where another graded potential is caused by the release of a chemical signal from the axon terminals. (4) An action potential is
initiated at the initial segment of this neuron and travels up the sensory pathway to a region of the brain called the thalamus. Another
synapse passes the information along to the next neuron. (5) The sensory pathway ends when the signal reaches the cerebral cortex. (6)
After integration with neurons in other parts of the cerebral cortex, a motor command is sent from the precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex.
(7) The upper motor neuron sends an action potential down to the spinal cord. The target of the upper motor neuron is the dendrites of the
lower motor neuron in the gray matter of the spinal cord. (8) The axon of the lower motor neuron emerges from the spinal cord in a nerve
and connects to a muscle through a neuromuscular junction to cause contraction of the target muscle.
making electrical signaling slower.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is one such disease. It is an example of an autoimmune disease. The antibodies
produced by lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) mark myelin as something that should not be in the body.
This causes inflammation and the destruction of the myelin in the central nervous system. As the insulation
around the axons is destroyed by the disease, scarring becomes obvious. This is where the name of the disease
comes from; sclerosis means hardening of tissue, which is what a scar is. Multiple scars are found in the white
matter of the brain and spinal cord. The symptoms of MS include both somatic and autonomic deficits. Control of
the musculature is compromised, as is control of organs such as the bladder.
Guillain-Barré (pronounced gee-YAN bah-RAY) syndrome is an example of a demyelinating disease of the
peripheral nervous system. It is also the result of an autoimmune reaction, but the inflammation is in peripheral
nerves. Sensory symptoms or motor deficits are common, and autonomic failures can lead to changes in the
heart rhythm or a drop in blood pressure, especially when standing, which causes dizziness.
12.3 • The Function of Nervous Tissue
465
Imagine you are about to take a shower in the morning before going to school. You have turned on the faucet to start
the water as you prepare to get in the shower. After a few minutes, you expect the water to be a temperature that
will be comfortable to enter. So you put your hand out into the spray of water. What happens next depends on how
your nervous system interacts with the stimulus of the water temperature and what you do in response to that
stimulus.
Found in the skin of your fingers or toes is a type of sensory receptor that is sensitive to temperature, called a
thermoreceptor. When you place your hand under the shower (Figure 12.15), the cell membrane of the
thermoreceptors changes its electrical state (voltage). The amount of change is dependent on the strength of the
stimulus (how hot the water is). This is called a graded potential. If the stimulus is strong, the voltage of the cell
membrane will change enough to generate an electrical signal that will travel down the axon. You have learned
about this type of signaling before, with respect to the interaction of nerves and muscles at the neuromuscular
junction. The voltage at which such a signal is generated is called the threshold, and the resulting electrical signal is
called an action potential. In this example, the action potential travels—a process known as propagation—along
the axon from the axon hillock to the axon terminals and into the synaptic end bulbs. When this signal reaches the
end bulbs, it causes the release of a signaling molecule called a neurotransmitter.
FIGURE 12.15
The Sensory Input
Receptors in the skin sense the temperature of the water.
The neurotransmitter diffuses across the short distance of the synapse and binds to a receptor protein of the target
neuron. When the molecular signal binds to the receptor, the cell membrane of the target neuron changes its
electrical state and a new graded potential begins. If that graded potential is strong enough to reach threshold, the
second neuron generates an action potential at its axon hillock. The target of this neuron is another neuron in the
thalamus of the brain, the part of the CNS that acts as a relay for sensory information. At another synapse,
neurotransmitter is released and binds to its receptor. The thalamus then sends the sensory information to the
cerebral cortex, the outermost layer of gray matter in the brain, where conscious perception of that water
temperature begins.
Within the cerebral cortex, information is processed among many neurons, integrating the stimulus of the water
temperature with other sensory stimuli, with your emotional state (you just aren't ready to wake up; the bed is
calling to you), memories (perhaps of the lab notes you have to study before a quiz). Finally, a plan is developed
about what to do, whether that is to turn the temperature up, turn the whole shower off and go back to bed, or step
into the shower. To do any of these things, the cerebral cortex has to send a command out to your body to move
muscles (Figure 12.16).
466
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.16
The Motor Response
On the basis of the sensory input and the integration in the CNS, a motor response is formulated
and executed.
A region of the cortex is specialized for sending signals down to the spinal cord for movement. The upper motor
neuron is in this region, called the precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex, which has an axon that extends all the
way down the spinal cord. At the level of the spinal cord at which this axon makes a synapse, a graded potential
occurs in the cell membrane of a lower motor neuron. This second motor neuron is responsible for causing muscle
fibers to contract. In the manner described in the chapter on muscle tissue, an action potential travels along the
motor neuron axon into the periphery. The axon terminates on muscle fibers at the neuromuscular junction.
Acetylcholine is released at this specialized synapse, which causes the muscle action potential to begin, following a
large potential known as an end plate potential. When the lower motor neuron excites the muscle fiber, it contracts.
All of this occurs in a fraction of a second, but this story is the basis of how the nervous system functions.
CAREER CONNECTION
Neurophysiologist
Understanding how the nervous system works could be a driving force in your career. Studying neurophysiology is a
very rewarding path to follow. It means that there is a lot of work to do, but the rewards are worth the effort.
The career path of a research scientist can be straightforward: college, graduate school, postdoctoral research,
academic research position at a university. A Bachelor’s degree in science will get you started, and for
neurophysiology that might be in biology, psychology, computer science, engineering, or neuroscience. But the real
specialization comes in graduate school. There are many different programs out there to study the nervous system,
not just neuroscience itself. Most graduate programs are doctoral, meaning that a Master’s degree is not part of the
work. These are usually considered five-year programs, with the first two years dedicated to course work and finding
a research mentor, and the last three years dedicated to finding a research topic and pursuing that with a near
single-mindedness. The research will usually result in a few publications in scientific journals, which will make up
the bulk of a doctoral dissertation. After graduating with a Ph.D., researchers will go on to find specialized work
called a postdoctoral fellowship within established labs. In this position, a researcher starts to establish their own
research career with the hopes of finding an academic position at a research university.
Other options are available if you are interested in how the nervous system works. Especially for neurophysiology, a
medical degree might be more suitable so you can learn about the clinical applications of neurophysiology and
possibly work with human subjects. An academic career is not a necessity. Biotechnology firms are eager to find
motivated scientists ready to tackle the tough questions about how the nervous system works so that therapeutic
chemicals can be tested on some of the most challenging disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s
disease, or spinal cord injury.
12.3 • The Function of Nervous Tissue
467
Others with a medical degree and a specialization in neuroscience go on to work directly with patients, diagnosing
and treating mental disorders. You can do this as a psychiatrist, a neuropsychologist, a neuroscience nurse, or a
neurodiagnostic technician, among other possible career paths.
12.4 The Action Potential
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the components of the membrane that establish the resting membrane potential
•
Describe the changes that occur to the membrane that result in the action potential
The functions of the nervous system—sensation, integration, and response—depend on the functions of the neurons
underlying these pathways. To understand how neurons are able to communicate, it is necessary to describe the
role of an excitable membrane in generating these signals. The basis of this communication is the action potential,
which demonstrates how changes in the membrane can constitute a signal. Looking at the way these signals work in
more variable circumstances involves a look at graded potentials, which will be covered in the next section.
Electrically Active Cell Membranes
Most cells in the body make use of charged particles, ions, to build up a charge across the cell membrane.
Previously, this was shown to be a part of how muscle cells work. For skeletal muscles to contract, based on
excitation–contraction coupling, requires input from a neuron. Both of the cells make use of the cell membrane to
regulate ion movement between the extracellular fluid and cytosol.
As you learned in the chapter on cells, the cell membrane is primarily responsible for regulating what can cross the
membrane and what stays on only one side. The cell membrane is a phospholipid bilayer, so only substances that
can pass directly through the hydrophobic core can diffuse through unaided. Charged particles, which are
hydrophilic by definition, cannot pass through the cell membrane without assistance (Figure 12.17).
Transmembrane proteins, specifically channel proteins, make this possible. Several passive transport channels, as
well as active transport pumps, are necessary to generate a transmembrane potential and an action potential. Of
special interest is the carrier protein referred to as the sodium/potassium pump that moves sodium ions (Na+) out of
a cell and potassium ions (K+) into a cell, thus regulating ion concentration on both sides of the cell membrane.
FIGURE 12.17
Cell Membrane and Transmembrane Proteins
The cell membrane is composed of a phospholipid bilayer and has many
transmembrane proteins, including different types of channel proteins that serve as ion channels.
The sodium/potassium pump requires energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), so it is also referred to as
an ATPase. As was explained in the cell chapter, the concentration of Na+ is higher outside the cell than inside, and
the concentration of K+ is higher inside the cell than outside. That means that this pump is moving the ions against
the concentration gradients for sodium and potassium, which is why it requires energy. In fact, the pump basically
maintains those concentration gradients.
468
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
Ion channels are pores that allow specific charged particles to cross the membrane in response to an existing
concentration gradient. Proteins are capable of spanning the cell membrane, including its hydrophobic core, and can
interact with the charge of ions because of the varied properties of amino acids found within specific domains or
regions of the protein channel. Hydrophobic amino acids are found in the domains that are apposed to the
hydrocarbon tails of the phospholipids. Hydrophilic amino acids are exposed to the fluid environments of the
extracellular fluid and cytosol. Additionally, the ions will interact with the hydrophilic amino acids, which will be
selective for the charge of the ion. Channels for cations (positive ions) will have negatively charged side chains in the
pore. Channels for anions (negative ions) will have positively charged side chains in the pore. This is called
electrochemical exclusion, meaning that the channel pore is charge-specific.
Ion channels can also be specified by the diameter of the pore. The distance between the amino acids will be
specific for the diameter of the ion when it dissociates from the water molecules surrounding it. Because of the
surrounding water molecules, larger pores are not ideal for smaller ions because the water molecules will interact,
by hydrogen bonds, more readily than the amino acid side chains. This is called size exclusion. Some ion channels
are selective for charge but not necessarily for size, and thus are called a nonspecific channel. These nonspecific
channels allow cations—particularly Na+, K+, and Ca2+—to cross the membrane, but exclude anions.
Ion channels do not always freely allow ions to diffuse across the membrane. Some are opened by certain events,
meaning the channels are gated. So another way that channels can be categorized is on the basis of how they are
gated. Although these classes of ion channels are found primarily in the cells of nervous or muscular tissue, they
also can be found in the cells of epithelial and connective tissues.
A ligand-gated channel opens because a signaling molecule, a ligand, binds to the extracellular region of the
channel. This type of channel is also known as an ionotropic receptor because when the ligand, known as a
neurotransmitter in the nervous system, binds to the protein, ions cross the membrane changing its charge (Figure
12.18).
FIGURE 12.18
Ligand-Gated Channels
When the ligand, in this case the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, binds to a specific location on
the extracellular surface of the channel protein, the pore opens to allow select ions through. The ions, in this case, are cations of sodium,
calcium, and potassium.
A mechanically gated channel opens because of a physical distortion of the cell membrane. Many channels
associated with the sense of touch (somatosensation) are mechanically gated. For example, as pressure is applied
to the skin, these channels open and allow ions to enter the cell. Similar to this type of channel would be the
channel that opens on the basis of temperature changes, as in testing the water in the shower (Figure 12.19).
12.4 • The Action Potential
469
FIGURE 12.19
Mechanically Gated Channels
When a mechanical change occurs in the surrounding tissue, such as pressure or touch,
the channel is physically opened. Thermoreceptors work on a similar principle. When the local tissue temperature changes, the protein
reacts by physically opening the channel.
A voltage-gated channel is a channel that responds to changes in the electrical properties of the membrane in
which it is embedded. Normally, the inner portion of the membrane is at a negative voltage. When that voltage
becomes less negative, the channel begins to allow ions to cross the membrane (Figure 12.20).
FIGURE 12.20
Voltage-Gated Channels
Voltage-gated channels open when the transmembrane voltage changes around them. Amino
acids in the structure of the protein are sensitive to charge and cause the pore to open to the selected ion.
A leakage channel is randomly gated, meaning that it opens and closes at random, hence the reference to leaking.
There is no actual event that opens the channel; instead, it has an intrinsic rate of switching between the open and
closed states. Leakage channels contribute to the resting transmembrane voltage of the excitable membrane
(Figure 12.21).
470
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.21
Leakage Channels
In certain situations, ions need to move across the membrane randomly. The particular electrical
properties of certain cells are modified by the presence of this type of channel.
The Membrane Potential
The electrical state of the cell membrane can have several variations. These are all variations in the membrane
potential. A potential is a distribution of charge across the cell membrane, measured in millivolts (mV). The
standard is to compare the inside of the cell relative to the outside, so the membrane potential is a value
representing the charge on the intracellular side of the membrane based on the outside being zero, relatively
speaking (Figure 12.22).
FIGURE 12.22
Measuring Charge across a Membrane with a Voltmeter
A recording electrode is inserted into the cell and a
reference electrode is outside the cell. By comparing the charge measured by these two electrodes, the transmembrane voltage is
determined. It is conventional to express that value for the cytosol relative to the outside.
The concentration of ions in extracellular and intracellular fluids is largely balanced, with a net neutral charge.
However, a slight difference in charge occurs right at the membrane surface, both internally and externally. It is the
difference in this very limited region that has all the power in neurons (and muscle cells) to generate electrical
signals, including action potentials.
Before these electrical signals can be described, the resting state of the membrane must be explained. When the
cell is at rest, and the ion channels are closed (except for leakage channels which randomly open), ions are
distributed across the membrane in a very predictable way. The concentration of Na+ outside the cell is 10 times
greater than the concentration inside. Also, the concentration of K+ inside the cell is greater than outside. The
cytosol contains a high concentration of anions, in the form of phosphate ions and negatively charged proteins.
12.4 • The Action Potential
471
Large anions are a component of the inner cell membrane, including specialized phospholipids and proteins
associated with the inner leaflet of the membrane (leaflet is a term used for one side of the lipid bilayer membrane).
The negative charge is localized in the large anions.
With the ions distributed across the membrane at these concentrations, the difference in charge is measured at -70
mV, the value described as the resting membrane potential. The exact value measured for the resting membrane
potential varies between cells, but -70 mV is most commonly used as this value. This voltage would actually be
much lower except for the contributions of some important proteins in the membrane. Leakage channels allow Na+
to slowly move into the cell or K+ to slowly move out, and the Na+/K+ pump restores them. This may appear to be a
waste of energy, but each has a role in maintaining the membrane potential.
The Action Potential
Resting membrane potential describes the steady state of the cell, which is a dynamic process that is balanced by
ion leakage and ion pumping. Without any outside influence, it will not change. To get an electrical signal started, the
membrane potential has to change.
This starts with a channel opening for Na+ in the membrane. Because the concentration of Na+ is higher outside the
cell than inside the cell by a factor of 10, ions will rush into the cell that are driven largely by the concentration
gradient. Because sodium is a positively charged ion, it will change the relative voltage immediately inside the cell
relative to immediately outside. The resting potential is the state of the membrane at a voltage of -70 mV, so the
sodium cation entering the cell will cause it to become less negative. This is known as depolarization, meaning the
membrane potential moves toward zero.
The concentration gradient for Na+ is so strong that it will continue to enter the cell even after the membrane
potential has become zero, so that the voltage immediately around the pore begins to become positive. The
electrical gradient also plays a role, as negative proteins below the membrane attract the sodium ion. The
membrane potential will reach +30 mV by the time sodium has entered the cell.
As the membrane potential reaches +30 mV, other voltage-gated channels are opening in the membrane. These
channels are specific for the potassium ion. A concentration gradient acts on K+, as well. As K+ starts to leave the
cell, taking a positive charge with it, the membrane potential begins to move back toward its resting voltage. This is
called repolarization, meaning that the membrane voltage moves back toward the -70 mV value of the resting
membrane potential.
Repolarization returns the membrane potential to the -70 mV value that indicates the resting potential, but it
actually overshoots that value. Potassium ions reach equilibrium when the membrane voltage is below -70 mV, so a
period of hyperpolarization occurs while the K+ channels are open. Those K+ channels are slightly delayed in closing,
accounting for this short overshoot.
What has been described here is the action potential, which is presented as a graph of voltage over time in Figure
12.23. It is the electrical signal that nervous tissue generates for communication. The change in the membrane
voltage from -70 mV at rest to +30 mV at the end of depolarization is a 100 mV change. That can also be written as a
0.1 V change. To put that value in perspective, think about a battery. An AA battery that you might find in a television
remote has a voltage of 1.5 V, or a 9 V battery (the rectangular battery with two posts on one end) is, obviously, 9 V.
The change seen in the action potential is one or two orders of magnitude less than the charge in these batteries. In
fact, the membrane potential can be described as a battery. A charge is stored across the membrane that can be
released under the correct conditions. A battery in your remote has stored a charge that is “released” when you
push a button.
472
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.23
Graph of Action Potential
Plotting voltage measured across the cell membrane against time, the action potential
begins with depolarization, followed by repolarization, which goes past the resting potential into hyperpolarization, and finally the
membrane returns to rest.
INTERACTIVE LINK
What happens across the membrane of an electrically active cell is a dynamic process that is hard to visualize with
static images or through text descriptions. View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/dynamic1) to learn more about
this process. What is the difference between the driving force for Na+ and K+? And what is similar about the
movement of these two ions?
The question is, now, what initiates the action potential? The description above conveniently glosses over that point.
But it is vital to understanding what is happening. The membrane potential will stay at the resting voltage until
something changes. The description above just says that a Na+ channel opens. Now, to say “a channel opens” does
not mean that one individual transmembrane protein changes. Instead, it means that one kind of channel opens.
There are a few different types of channels that allow Na+ to cross the membrane. A ligand-gated Na+ channel will
open when a neurotransmitter binds to it and a mechanically gated Na+ channel will open when a physical stimulus
affects a sensory receptor (like pressure applied to the skin compresses a touch receptor). Whether it is a
neurotransmitter binding to its receptor protein or a sensory stimulus activating a sensory receptor cell, some
stimulus gets the process started. Sodium starts to enter the cell and the membrane becomes less negative.
A third type of channel that is an important part of depolarization in the action potential is the voltage-gated Na+
channel. The channels that start depolarizing the membrane because of a stimulus help the cell to depolarize from
-70 mV to -55 mV. Once the membrane reaches that voltage, the voltage-gated Na+ channels open. This is what is
known as the threshold. Any depolarization that does not change the membrane potential to -55 mV or higher will
not reach threshold and thus will not result in an action potential. Also, any stimulus that depolarizes the membrane
to -55 mV or beyond will cause a large number of channels to open and an action potential will be initiated.
Because of the threshold, the action potential can be likened to a digital event—it either happens or it does not. If
the threshold is not reached, then no action potential occurs. If depolarization reaches -55 mV, then the action
potential continues and runs all the way to +30 mV, at which K+ causes repolarization, including the hyperpolarizing
overshoot. Also, those changes are the same for every action potential, which means that once the threshold is
reached, the exact same thing happens. A stronger stimulus, which might depolarize the membrane well past
threshold, will not make a “bigger” action potential. Action potentials are “all or none.” Either the membrane
reaches the threshold and everything occurs as described above, or the membrane does not reach the threshold
and nothing else happens. All action potentials peak at the same voltage (+30 mV), so one action potential is not
bigger than another. Stronger stimuli will initiate multiple action potentials more quickly, but the individual signals
are not bigger. Thus, for example, you will not feel a greater sensation of pain, or have a stronger muscle contraction,
because of the size of the action potential because they are not different sizes.
As we have seen, the depolarization and repolarization of an action potential are dependent on two types of
channels (the voltage-gated Na+ channel and the voltage-gated K+ channel). The voltage-gated Na+ channel actually
12.4 • The Action Potential
473
has two gates. One is the activation gate, which opens when the membrane potential crosses -55 mV. The other
gate is the inactivation gate, which closes after a specific period of time—on the order of a fraction of a millisecond.
When a cell is at rest, the activation gate is closed and the inactivation gate is open. However, when the threshold is
reached, the activation gate opens, allowing Na+ to rush into the cell. Timed with the peak of depolarization, the
inactivation gate closes. During repolarization, no more sodium can enter the cell. When the membrane potential
passes -55 mV again, the activation gate closes. After that, the inactivation gate re-opens, making the channel ready
to start the whole process over again.
The voltage-gated K+ channel has only one gate, which is sensitive to a membrane voltage of -50 mV. However, it
does not open as quickly as the voltage-gated Na+ channel does. It might take a fraction of a millisecond for the
channel to open once that voltage has been reached. The timing of this coincides exactly with when the Na+ flow
peaks, so voltage-gated K+ channels open just as the voltage-gated Na+ channels are being inactivated. As the
membrane potential repolarizes and the voltage passes -50 mV again, the channel closes—again, with a little delay.
Potassium continues to leave the cell for a short while and the membrane potential becomes more negative,
resulting in the hyperpolarizing overshoot. Then the channel closes again and the membrane can return to the
resting potential because of the ongoing activity of the non-gated channels and the Na+/K+ pump.
All of this takes place within approximately 2 milliseconds (Figure 12.24). While an action potential is in progress,
another one cannot be initiated. That effect is referred to as the refractory period. There are two phases of the
refractory period: the absolute refractory period and the relative refractory period. During the absolute phase,
another action potential will not start. This is because of the inactivation gate of the voltage-gated Na+ channel.
Once that channel is back to its resting conformation (less than -55 mV), a new action potential could be started, but
only by a stronger stimulus than the one that initiated the current action potential. This is because of the flow of K+
out of the cell. Because that ion is rushing out, any Na+ that tries to enter will not depolarize the cell, but will only
keep the cell from hyperpolarizing.
FIGURE 12.24
Stages of an Action Potential
Plotting voltage measured across the cell membrane against time, the events of the
action potential can be related to specific changes in the membrane voltage. (1) At rest, the membrane voltage is -70 mV. (2) The
membrane begins to depolarize when an external stimulus is applied. (3) The membrane voltage begins a rapid rise toward +30 mV. (4) The
membrane voltage starts to return to a negative value. (5) Repolarization continues past the resting membrane voltage, resulting in
hyperpolarization. (6) The membrane voltage returns to the resting value shortly after hyperpolarization.
Propagation of the Action Potential
The action potential is initiated at the beginning of the axon, at what is called the initial segment. There is a high
density of voltage-gated Na+ channels so that rapid depolarization can take place here. Going down the length of the
axon, the action potential is propagated because more voltage-gated Na+ channels are opened as the depolarization
spreads. This spreading occurs because Na+ enters through the channel and moves along the inside of the cell
membrane. As the Na+ moves, or flows, a short distance along the cell membrane, its positive charge depolarizes a
little more of the cell membrane. As that depolarization spreads, new voltage-gated Na+ channels open and more
ions rush into the cell, spreading the depolarization a little farther.
Because voltage-gated Na+ channels are inactivated at the peak of the depolarization, they cannot be opened again
for a brief time—the absolute refractory period. Because of this, depolarization spreading back toward previously
opened channels has no effect. The action potential must propagate toward the axon terminals; as a result, the
474
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
polarity of the neuron is maintained, as mentioned above.
Propagation, as described above, applies to unmyelinated axons. When myelination is present, the action potential
propagates differently. Sodium ions that enter the cell at the initial segment start to spread along the length of the
axon segment, but there are no voltage-gated Na+ channels until the first node of Ranvier. Because there is not
constant opening of these channels along the axon segment, the depolarization spreads at an optimal speed. The
distance between nodes is the optimal distance to keep the membrane still depolarized above threshold at the next
node. As Na+ spreads along the inside of the membrane of the axon segment, the charge starts to dissipate. If the
node were any farther down the axon, that depolarization would have fallen off too much for voltage-gated Na+
channels to be activated at the next node of Ranvier. If the nodes were any closer together, the speed of propagation
would be slower.
Propagation along an unmyelinated axon is referred to as continuous conduction; along the length of a myelinated
axon, it is saltatory conduction. Continuous conduction is slow because there are always voltage-gated Na+
channels opening, and more and more Na+ is rushing into the cell. Saltatory conduction is faster because the action
potential basically jumps from one node to the next (saltare = “to leap”), and the new influx of Na+ renews the
depolarized membrane. Along with the myelination of the axon, the diameter of the axon can influence the speed of
conduction. Much as water runs faster in a wide river than in a narrow creek, Na+-based depolarization spreads
faster down a wide axon than down a narrow one. This concept is known as resistance and is generally true for
electrical wires or plumbing, just as it is true for axons, although the specific conditions are different at the scales of
electrons or ions versus water in a river.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Potassium Concentration
Glial cells, especially astrocytes, are responsible for maintaining the chemical environment of the CNS tissue. The
concentrations of ions in the extracellular fluid are the basis for how the membrane potential is established and
changes in electrochemical signaling. If the balance of ions is upset, drastic outcomes are possible.
Normally the concentration of K+ is higher inside the neuron than outside. After the repolarizing phase of the action
potential, K+ leakage channels and the Na+/K+ pump ensure that the ions return to their original locations. Following
a stroke or other ischemic event, extracellular K+ levels are elevated. The astrocytes in the area are equipped to
clear excess K+ to aid the pump. But when the level is far out of balance, the effects can be irreversible.
Astrocytes can become reactive in cases such as these, which impairs their ability to maintain the local chemical
environment. The glial cells enlarge and their processes swell. They lose their K+ buffering ability and the function of
the pump is affected, or even reversed. One of the early signs of cell disease is this "leaking" of sodium ions into the
body cells. This sodium/potassium imbalance negatively affects the internal chemistry of cells, preventing them
from functioning normally.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/neurolab) to see a virtual neurophysiology lab, and to observe
electrophysiological processes in the nervous system, where scientists directly measure the electrical signals
produced by neurons. Often, the action potentials occur so rapidly that watching a screen to see them occur is not
helpful. A speaker is powered by the signals recorded from a neuron and it “pops” each time the neuron fires an
action potential. These action potentials are firing so fast that it sounds like static on the radio. Electrophysiologists
can recognize the patterns within that static to understand what is happening. Why is the leech model used for
measuring the electrical activity of neurons instead of using humans?
12.4 • The Action Potential
475
12.5 Communication Between Neurons
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the differences between the types of graded potentials
•
Categorize the major neurotransmitters by chemical type and effect
The electrical changes taking place within a neuron, as described in the previous section, are similar to a light switch
being turned on. A stimulus starts the depolarization, but the action potential runs on its own once a threshold has
been reached. The question is now, “What flips the light switch on?” Temporary changes to the cell membrane
voltage can result from neurons receiving information from the environment, or from the action of one neuron on
another. These special types of potentials influence a neuron and determine whether an action potential will occur
or not. Many of these transient signals originate at the synapse.
Graded Potentials
Local changes in the membrane potential are called graded potentials and are usually associated with the dendrites
of a neuron. The amount of change in the membrane potential is determined by the size of the stimulus that causes
it. In the example of testing the temperature of the shower, slightly warm water would only initiate a small change in
a thermoreceptor, whereas hot water would cause a large amount of change in the membrane potential.
Graded potentials can be of two sorts, either they are depolarizing or hyperpolarizing (Figure 12.25). For a
membrane at the resting potential, a graded potential represents a change in that voltage either above -70 mV or
below -70 mV. Depolarizing graded potentials are often the result of Na+ or Ca2+ entering the cell. Both of these ions
have higher concentrations outside the cell than inside; because they have a positive charge, they will move into the
cell causing it to become less negative relative to the outside. Hyperpolarizing graded potentials can be caused by
K+ leaving the cell or Cl- entering the cell. If a positive charge moves out of a cell, the cell becomes more negative; if
a negative charge enters the cell, the same thing happens.
FIGURE 12.25
Graded Potentials
Graded potentials are temporary changes in the membrane voltage, the characteristics of which
depend on the size of the stimulus. Some types of stimuli cause depolarization of the membrane, whereas others cause hyperpolarization.
It depends on the specific ion channels that are activated in the cell membrane.
Types of Graded Potentials
For the unipolar cells of sensory neurons—both those with free nerve endings and those within
encapsulations—graded potentials develop in the dendrites that influence the generation of an action potential in
the axon of the same cell. This is called a generator potential. For other sensory receptor cells, such as taste cells
or photoreceptors of the retina, graded potentials in their membranes result in the release of neurotransmitters at
synapses with sensory neurons. This is called a receptor potential.
476
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
A postsynaptic potential (PSP) is the graded potential in the dendrites of a neuron that is receiving synapses from
other cells. Postsynaptic potentials can be depolarizing or hyperpolarizing. Depolarization in a postsynaptic potential
is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) because it causes the membrane potential to move toward
threshold. Hyperpolarization in a postsynaptic potential is an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) because it
causes the membrane potential to move away from threshold.
Summation
All types of graded potentials will result in small changes of either depolarization or hyperpolarization in the voltage
of a membrane. These changes can lead to the neuron reaching threshold if the changes add together, or summate.
The combined effects of different types of graded potentials are illustrated in Figure 12.26. If the total change in
voltage in the membrane is a positive 15 mV, meaning that the membrane depolarizes from -70 mV to -55 mV, then
the graded potentials will result in the membrane reaching threshold.
For receptor potentials, threshold is not a factor because the change in membrane potential for receptor cells
directly causes neurotransmitter release. However, generator potentials can initiate action potentials in the sensory
neuron axon, and postsynaptic potentials can initiate an action potential in the axon of other neurons. Graded
potentials summate at a specific location at the beginning of the axon to initiate the action potential, namely the
initial segment. For sensory neurons, which do not have a cell body between the dendrites and the axon, the initial
segment is directly adjacent to the dendritic endings. For all other neurons, the axon hillock is essentially the initial
segment of the axon, and it is where summation takes place. These locations have a high density of voltage-gated
Na+ channels that initiate the depolarizing phase of the action potential.
Summation can be spatial or temporal, meaning it can be the result of multiple graded potentials at different
locations on the neuron, or all at the same place but separated in time. Spatial summation is related to associating
the activity of multiple inputs to a neuron with each other. Temporal summation is the relationship of multiple
action potentials from a single cell resulting in a significant change in the membrane potential. Spatial and temporal
summation can act together, as well.
FIGURE 12.26
Postsynaptic Potential Summation
The result of summation of postsynaptic potentials is the overall change in the
membrane potential. At point A, several different excitatory postsynaptic potentials add up to a large depolarization. At point B, a mix of
excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials result in a different end result for the membrane potential.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/summation) to learn about summation. The process of converting electrical
signals to chemical signals and back requires subtle changes that can result in transient increases or decreases in
membrane voltage. To cause a lasting change in the target cell, multiple signals are usually added together, or
summated. Does spatial summation have to happen all at once, or can the separate signals arrive on the
postsynaptic neuron at slightly different times? Explain your answer.
12.5 • Communication Between Neurons
477
Synapses
There are two types of connections between electrically active cells, chemical synapses and electrical synapses. In
a chemical synapse, a chemical signal—namely, a neurotransmitter—is released from one cell and it affects the
other cell. In an electrical synapse, there is a direct connection between the two cells so that ions can pass directly
from one cell to the next. If one cell is depolarized in an electrical synapse, the joined cell also depolarizes because
the ions pass between the cells. Chemical synapses involve the transmission of chemical information from one cell
to the next. This section will concentrate on the chemical type of synapse.
An example of a chemical synapse is the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) described in the chapter on muscle tissue.
In the nervous system, there are many more synapses that are essentially the same as the NMJ. All synapses have
common characteristics, which can be summarized in this list:
•
presynaptic element
•
neurotransmitter (packaged in vesicles)
•
synaptic cleft
•
receptor proteins
•
postsynaptic element
•
neurotransmitter elimination or re-uptake
For the NMJ, these characteristics are as follows: the presynaptic element is the motor neuron's axon terminals, the
neurotransmitter is acetylcholine, the synaptic cleft is the space between the cells where the neurotransmitter
diffuses, the receptor protein is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the postsynaptic element is the sarcolemma of
the muscle cell, and the neurotransmitter is eliminated by acetylcholinesterase. Other synapses are similar to this,
and the specifics are different, but they all contain the same characteristics.
Neurotransmitter Release
When an action potential reaches the axon terminals, voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the membrane of the synaptic
end bulb open. The concentration of Ca2+ increases inside the end bulb, and the Ca2+ ion associates with proteins in
the outer surface of neurotransmitter vesicles. The Ca2+ facilitates the merging of the vesicle with the presynaptic
membrane so that the neurotransmitter is released through exocytosis into the small gap between the cells, known
as the synaptic cleft.
Once in the synaptic cleft, the neurotransmitter diffuses the short distance to the postsynaptic membrane and can
interact with neurotransmitter receptors. Receptors are specific for the neurotransmitter, and the two fit together
like a key and lock. One neurotransmitter binds to its receptor and will not bind to receptors for other
neurotransmitters, making the binding a specific chemical event (Figure 12.27).
478
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 12.27
The Synapse
The synapse is a connection between a neuron and its target cell (which is not necessarily a neuron). The
presynaptic element is the synaptic end bulb of the axon where Ca2+ enters the bulb to cause vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release.
The neurotransmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft to bind to its receptor. The neurotransmitter is cleared from the synapse either by
enzymatic degradation, neuronal reuptake, or glial reuptake.
Neurotransmitter Systems
There are several systems of neurotransmitters that are found at various synapses in the nervous system. These
groups refer to the chemicals that are the neurotransmitters, and within the groups are specific systems.
The first group, which is a neurotransmitter system of its own, is the cholinergic system. It is the system based on
acetylcholine. This includes the NMJ as an example of a cholinergic synapse, but cholinergic synapses are found in
other parts of the nervous system. They are in the autonomic nervous system, as well as distributed throughout the
brain.
The cholinergic system has two types of receptors, the nicotinic receptor is found in the NMJ as well as other
synapses. There is also an acetylcholine receptor known as the muscarinic receptor. Both of these receptors are
named for drugs that interact with the receptor in addition to acetylcholine. Nicotine will bind to the nicotinic
receptor and activate it similar to acetylcholine. Muscarine, a product of certain mushrooms, will bind to the
muscarinic receptor. However, nicotine will not bind to the muscarinic receptor and muscarine will not bind to the
nicotinic receptor.
Another group of neurotransmitters are amino acids. This includes glutamate (Glu), GABA (gamma-aminobutyric
acid, a derivative of glutamate), and glycine (Gly). These amino acids have an amino group and a carboxyl group in
their chemical structures. Glutamate is one of the 20 amino acids that are used to make proteins. Each amino acid
neurotransmitter would be part of its own system, namely the glutamatergic, GABAergic, and glycinergic systems.
They each have their own receptors and do not interact with each other. Amino acid neurotransmitters are
eliminated from the synapse by reuptake. A pump in the cell membrane of the presynaptic element, or sometimes a
neighboring glial cell, will clear the amino acid from the synaptic cleft so that it can be recycled, repackaged in
vesicles, and released again.
12.5 • Communication Between Neurons
479
Another class of neurotransmitter is the biogenic amine, a group of neurotransmitters that are enzymatically made
from amino acids. They have amino groups in them, but no longer have carboxyl groups and are therefore no longer
classified as amino acids. Serotonin is made from tryptophan. It is the basis of the serotonergic system, which has
its own specific receptors. Serotonin is transported back into the presynaptic cell for repackaging.
Other biogenic amines are made from tyrosine, and include dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Dopamine
is part of its own system, the dopaminergic system, which has dopamine receptors. Dopamine is removed from the
synapse by transport proteins in the presynaptic cell membrane. Norepinephrine and epinephrine belong to the
adrenergic neurotransmitter system. The two molecules are very similar and bind to the same receptors, which are
referred to as alpha and beta receptors. Norepinephrine and epinephrine are also transported back into the
presynaptic cell. The chemical epinephrine (epi- = “on”; “-nephrine” = kidney) is also known as adrenaline (renal =
“kidney”), and norepinephrine is sometimes referred to as noradrenaline. The adrenal gland produces epinephrine
and norepinephrine to be released into the blood stream as hormones.
A neuropeptide is a neurotransmitter molecule made up of chains of amino acids connected by peptide bonds. This
is what a protein is, but the term protein implies a certain length to the molecule. Some neuropeptides are quite
short, such as met-enkephalin, which is five amino acids long. Others are long, such as beta-endorphin, which is 31
amino acids long. Neuropeptides are often released at synapses in combination with another neurotransmitter, and
they often act as hormones in other systems of the body, such as vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or substance P.
The effect of a neurotransmitter on the postsynaptic element is entirely dependent on the receptor protein. First, if
there is no receptor protein in the membrane of the postsynaptic element, then the neurotransmitter has no effect.
The depolarizing or hyperpolarizing effect is also dependent on the receptor. When acetylcholine binds to the
nicotinic receptor, the postsynaptic cell is depolarized. This is because the receptor is a cation channel and
positively charged Na+ will rush into the cell. However, when acetylcholine binds to the muscarinic receptor, of
which there are several variants, it might cause depolarization or hyperpolarization of the target cell.
The amino acid neurotransmitters, glutamate, glycine, and GABA, are almost exclusively associated with just one
effect. Glutamate is considered an excitatory amino acid, but only because Glu receptors in the adult cause
depolarization of the postsynaptic cell. Glycine and GABA are considered inhibitory amino acids, again because their
receptors cause hyperpolarization.
The biogenic amines have mixed effects. For example, the dopamine receptors that are classified as D1 receptors
are excitatory whereas D2-type receptors are inhibitory. Biogenic amine receptors and neuropeptide receptors can
have even more complex effects because some may not directly affect the membrane potential, but rather have an
effect on gene transcription or other metabolic processes in the neuron. The characteristics of the various
neurotransmitter systems presented in this section are organized in Table 12.3.
The important thing to remember about neurotransmitters, and signaling chemicals in general, is that the effect is
entirely dependent on the receptor. Neurotransmitters bind to one of two classes of receptors at the cell surface,
ionotropic or metabotropic (Figure 12.28). Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels, such as the nicotinic
receptor for acetylcholine or the glycine receptor. A metabotropic receptor involves a complex of proteins that
result in metabolic changes within the cell. The receptor complex includes the transmembrane receptor protein, a G
protein, and an effector protein. The neurotransmitter, referred to as the first messenger, binds to the receptor
protein on the extracellular surface of the cell, and the intracellular side of the protein initiates activity of the G
protein. The G protein is a guanosine triphosphate (GTP) hydrolase that physically moves from the receptor protein
to the effector protein to activate the latter. An effector protein is an enzyme that catalyzes the generation of a new
molecule, which acts as the intracellular mediator of the signal that binds to the receptor. This intracellular mediator
is called the second messenger.
Different receptors use different second messengers. Two common examples of second messengers are cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). The enzyme adenylate cyclase (an example of an
effector protein) makes cAMP, and phospholipase C is the enzyme that makes IP3. Second messengers, after they
are produced by the effector protein, cause metabolic changes within the cell. These changes are most likely the
activation of other enzymes in the cell. In neurons, they often modify ion channels, either opening or closing them.
These enzymes can also cause changes in the cell, such as the activation of genes in the nucleus, and therefore the
increased synthesis of proteins. In neurons, these kinds of changes are often the basis of stronger connections
480
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
between cells at the synapse and may be the basis of learning and memory.
FIGURE 12.28
Receptor Types
(a) An ionotropic receptor is a channel that opens when the neurotransmitter binds to it. (b) A
metabotropic receptor is a complex that causes metabolic changes in the cell when the neurotransmitter binds to it (1). After binding, the G
protein hydrolyzes ATP and moves to the effector protein (2). When the G protein contacts the effector protein, the latter is activated. In the
case shown, the effector protein then acts on ATP to generate a second messenger, cAMP (3). The second messenger can then go on to
cause changes in the neuron, such as opening or closing ion channels, metabolic changes, and changes in gene transcription.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/neurotrans) to learn about the release of a neurotransmitter. The action
potential reaches the end of the axon, called the axon terminal, and a chemical signal is released to tell the target
cell to do something—either to initiate a new action potential, or to suppress that activity. In a very short space, the
electrical signal of the action potential is changed into the chemical signal of a neurotransmitter and then back to
electrical changes in the target cell membrane. What is the importance of voltage-gated calcium channels in the
release of neurotransmitters?
12.5 • Communication Between Neurons
481
Characteristics of Neurotransmitter Systems
System
Cholinergic
Amino acids
Biogenic amines
Neuropeptides
Neurotransmitters
Acetylcholine
Glutamate,
glycine, GABA
Serotonin (5-HT),
dopamine,
norepinephrine,
(epinephrine)
Met-enkephalin,
beta-endorphin,
VIP, Substance P,
etc.
Receptors
Nicotinic and
muscarinic receptors
Glu receptors, gly
receptors, GABA
receptors
5-HT receptors, D1 and
D2 receptors, α-
adrenergic and β-
adrenergic receptors
Receptors are
too numerous to
list, but are
specific to the
peptides.
Elimination
Degradation by
acetylcholinesterase
Reuptake by
neurons or glia
Reuptake by neurons
Degradation by
enzymes called
peptidases
Postsynaptic
effect
Nicotinic receptor
causes
depolarization.
Muscarinic receptors
can cause both
depolarization or
hyperpolarization
depending on the
subtype.
Glu receptors
cause
depolarization.
Gly and GABA
receptors cause
hyperpolarization.
Depolarization or
hyperpolarization
depends on the specific
receptor. For example,
D1 receptors cause
depolarization and D2
receptors cause
hyperpolarization.
Depolarization or
hyperpolarization
depends on the
specific receptor.
TABLE 12.3
Disorders of the...
Nervous System
The underlying cause of some neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, appears to be
related to proteins—specifically, to proteins behaving badly. One of the strongest theories of what causes
Alzheimer’s disease is based on the accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques, dense conglomerations of a protein
that is not functioning correctly. Parkinson’s disease is linked to an increase in a protein known as alpha-
synuclein that is toxic to the cells of the substantia nigra nucleus in the midbrain.
For proteins to function correctly, they are dependent on their three-dimensional shape. The linear sequence of
amino acids folds into a three-dimensional shape that is based on the interactions between and among those
amino acids. When the folding is disturbed, and proteins take on a different shape, they stop functioning
correctly. But the disease is not necessarily the result of functional loss of these proteins; rather, these altered
proteins start to accumulate and may become toxic. For example, in Alzheimer’s, the hallmark of the disease is
the accumulation of these amyloid plaques in the cerebral cortex. The term coined to describe this sort of
disease is “proteopathy” and it includes other diseases. Creutzfeld-Jacob disease, the human variant of the
prion disease known as mad cow disease in the bovine, also involves the accumulation of amyloid plaques,
similar to Alzheimer’s. Diseases of other organ systems can fall into this group as well, such as cystic fibrosis or
type 2 diabetes. Recognizing the relationship between these diseases has suggested new therapeutic
possibilities. Interfering with the accumulation of the proteins, and possibly as early as their original production
within the cell, may unlock new ways to alleviate these devastating diseases.
482
12 • The Nervous System and Nervous Tissue
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
absolute refractory period
time during an action
period when another action potential cannot be
generated because the voltage-gated Na+ channel is
inactivated
action potential
change in voltage of a cell
membrane in response to a stimulus that results in
transmission of an electrical signal; unique to
neurons and muscle fibers
activation gate
part of the voltage-gated Na+ channel
that opens when the membrane voltage reaches
threshold
astrocyte
glial cell type of the CNS that provides
support for neurons and maintains the blood-brain
barrier
autonomic nervous system (ANS)
functional division
of the nervous system that is responsible for
homeostatic reflexes that coordinate control of
cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as glandular
tissue
axon
single process of the neuron that carries an
electrical signal (action potential) away from the cell
body toward a target cell
axon hillock
tapering of the neuron cell body that
gives rise to the axon
axon segment
single stretch of the axon insulated by
myelin and bounded by nodes of Ranvier at either
end (except for the first, which is after the initial
segment, and the last, which is followed by the axon
terminal)
axon terminal
end of the axon, where there are
usually several branches extending toward the
target cell
axoplasm
cytoplasm of an axon, which is different in
composition than the cytoplasm of the neuronal cell
body
biogenic amine
class of neurotransmitters that are
enzymatically derived from amino acids but no
longer contain a carboxyl group
bipolar
shape of a neuron with two processes
extending from the neuron cell body—the axon and
one dendrite
blood-brain barrier (BBB)
physiological barrier
between the circulatory system and the central
nervous system that establishes a privileged blood
supply, restricting the flow of substances into the
CNS
brain
the large organ of the central nervous system
composed of white and gray matter, contained
within the cranium and continuous with the spinal
cord
central nervous system (CNS)
anatomical division of
the nervous system located within the cranial and
vertebral cavities, namely the brain and spinal cord
cerebral cortex
outermost layer of gray matter in the
brain, where conscious perception takes place
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
circulatory medium within
the CNS that is produced by ependymal cells in the
choroid plexus filtering the blood
chemical synapse
connection between two neurons,
or between a neuron and its target, where a
neurotransmitter diffuses across a very short
distance
cholinergic system
neurotransmitter system of
acetylcholine, which includes its receptors and the
enzyme acetylcholinesterase
choroid plexus
specialized structure containing
ependymal cells that line blood capillaries and filter
blood to produce CSF in the four ventricles of the
brain
continuous conduction
slow propagation of an action
potential along an unmyelinated axon owing to
voltage-gated Na+ channels located along the entire
length of the cell membrane
dendrite
one of many branchlike processes that
extends from the neuron cell body and functions as
a contact for incoming signals (synapses) from other
neurons or sensory cells
depolarization
change in a cell membrane potential
from rest toward zero
effector protein
enzyme that catalyzes the
generation of a new molecule, which acts as the
intracellular mediator of the signal that binds to the
receptor
electrical synapse
connection between two neurons,
or any two electrically active cells, where ions flow
directly through channels spanning their adjacent
cell membranes
electrochemical exclusion
principle of selectively
allowing ions through a channel on the basis of their
charge
enteric nervous system (ENS)
neural tissue
associated with the digestive system that is
responsible for nervous control through autonomic
connections
ependymal cell
glial cell type in the CNS responsible
for producing cerebrospinal fluid
excitable membrane
cell membrane that regulates
the movement of ions so that an electrical signal
can be generated
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)
graded
potential in the postsynaptic membrane that is the
result of depolarization and makes an action
potential more likely to occur
G protein
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) hydrolase
12 • Key Terms
483
that physically moves from the receptor protein to
the effector protein to activate the latter
ganglion
localized collection of neuron cell bodies in
the peripheral nervous system
gated
property of a channel that determines how it
opens under specific conditions, such as voltage
change or physical deformation
generator potential
graded potential from dendrites
of a unipolar cell which generates the action
potential in the initial segment of that cell’s axon
glial cell
one of the various types of neural tissue
cells responsible for maintenance of the tissue, and
largely responsible for supporting neurons
graded potential
change in the membrane potential
that varies in size, depending on the size of the
stimulus that elicits it
gray matter
regions of the nervous system containing
cell bodies of neurons with few or no myelinated
axons; actually may be more pink or tan in color, but
called gray in contrast to white matter
inactivation gate
part of a voltage-gated Na+ channel
that closes when the membrane potential reaches
+30 mV
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP)
graded
potential in the postsynaptic membrane that is the
result of hyperpolarization and makes an action
potential less likely to occur
initial segment
first part of the axon as it emerges
from the axon hillock, where the electrical signals
known as action potentials are generated
integration
nervous system function that combines
sensory perceptions and higher cognitive functions
(memories, learning, emotion, etc.) to produce a
response
ionotropic receptor
neurotransmitter receptor that
acts as an ion channel gate, and opens by the
binding of the neurotransmitter
leakage channel
ion channel that opens randomly
and is not gated to a specific event, also known as a
non-gated channel
ligand-gated channels
another name for an
ionotropic receptor for which a neurotransmitter is
the ligand
lower motor neuron
second neuron in the motor
command pathway that is directly connected to the
skeletal muscle
mechanically gated channel
ion channel that opens
when a physical event directly affects the structure
of the protein
membrane potential
distribution of charge across
the cell membrane, based on the charges of ions
metabotropic receptor
neurotransmitter receptor
that involves a complex of proteins that cause
metabolic changes in a cell
microglia
glial cell type in the CNS that serves as the
resident component of the immune system
multipolar
shape of a neuron that has multiple
processes—the axon and two or more dendrites
muscarinic receptor
type of acetylcholine receptor
protein that is characterized by also binding to
muscarine and is a metabotropic receptor
myelin
lipid-rich insulating substance surrounding
the axons of many neurons, allowing for faster
transmission of electrical signals
myelin sheath
lipid-rich layer of insulation that
surrounds an axon, formed by oligodendrocytes in
the CNS and Schwann cells in the PNS; facilitates
the transmission of electrical signals
nerve
cord-like bundle of axons located in the
peripheral nervous system that transmits sensory
input and response output to and from the central
nervous system
neuron
neural tissue cell that is primarily responsible
for generating and propagating electrical signals
into, within, and out of the nervous system
neuropeptide
neurotransmitter type that includes
protein molecules and shorter chains of amino acids
neurotransmitter
chemical signal that is released
from the synaptic end bulb of a neuron to cause a
change in the target cell
nicotinic receptor
type of acetylcholine receptor
protein that is characterized by also binding to
nicotine and is an ionotropic receptor
node of Ranvier
gap between two myelinated regions
of an axon, allowing for strengthening of the
electrical signal as it propagates down the axon
nonspecific channel
channel that is not specific to
one ion over another, such as a nonspecific cation
channel that allows any positively charged ion
across the membrane
nucleus
in the nervous system, a localized collection
of neuron cell bodies that are functionally related; a
“center” of neural function
oligodendrocyte
glial cell type in the CNS that
provides the myelin insulation for axons in tracts
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
anatomical
division of the nervous system that is largely outside
the cranial and vertebral cavities, namely all parts
except the brain and spinal cord
postsynaptic potential (PSP)
graded potential in the
postsynaptic membrane caused by the binding of
neurotransmitter to protein receptors
precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex
region of the
cerebral cortex responsible for generating motor
commands, where the upper motor neuron cell
body is located
484
12 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
process
in cells, an extension of a cell body; in the
case of neurons, this includes the axon and
dendrites
propagation
movement of an action potential along
the length of an axon
receptor potential
graded potential in a specialized
sensory cell that directly causes the release of
neurotransmitter without an intervening action
potential
refractory period
time after the initiation of an action
potential when another action potential cannot be
generated
relative refractory period
time during the refractory
period when a new action potential can only be
initiated by a stronger stimulus than the current
action potential because voltage-gated K+ channels
are not closed
repolarization
return of the membrane potential to
its normally negative voltage at the end of the action
potential
resistance
property of an axon that relates to the
ability of particles to diffuse through the cytoplasm;
this is inversely proportional to the fiber diameter
response
nervous system function that causes a
target tissue (muscle or gland) to produce an event
as a consequence to stimuli
resting membrane potential
the difference in voltage
measured across a cell membrane under steady-
state conditions, typically -70 mV
saltatory conduction
quick propagation of the action
potential along a myelinated axon owing to voltage-
gated Na+ channels being present only at the nodes
of Ranvier
satellite cell
glial cell type in the PNS that provides
support for neurons in the ganglia
Schwann cell
glial cell type in the PNS that provides
the myelin insulation for axons in nerves
sensation
nervous system function that receives
information from the environment and translates it
into the electrical signals of nervous tissue
size exclusion
principle of selectively allowing ions
through a channel on the basis of their relative size
soma
in neurons, that portion of the cell that contains
the nucleus; the cell body, as opposed to the cell
processes (axons and dendrites)
somatic nervous system (SNS)
functional division of
the nervous system that is concerned with
conscious perception, voluntary movement, and
skeletal muscle reflexes
spatial summation
combination of graded potentials
across the neuronal cell membrane caused by
signals from separate presynaptic elements that
add up to initiate an action potential
spinal cord
organ of the central nervous system
found within the vertebral cavity and connected
with the periphery through spinal nerves; mediates
reflex behaviors
stimulus
an event in the external or internal
environment that registers as activity in a sensory
neuron
summate
to add together, as in the cumulative
change in postsynaptic potentials toward reaching
threshold in the membrane, either across a span of
the membrane or over a certain amount of time
synapse
narrow junction across which a chemical
signal passes from neuron to the next, initiating a
new electrical signal in the target cell
synaptic cleft
small gap between cells in a chemical
synapse where neurotransmitter diffuses from the
presynaptic element to the postsynaptic element
synaptic end bulb
swelling at the end of an axon
where neurotransmitter molecules are released
onto a target cell across a synapse
temporal summation
combination of graded
potentials at the same location on a neuron
resulting in a strong signal from one input
thalamus
region of the central nervous system that
acts as a relay for sensory pathways
thermoreceptor
type of sensory receptor capable of
transducing temperature stimuli into neural action
potentials
threshold
membrane voltage at which an action
potential is initiated
tract
bundle of axons in the central nervous system
having the same function and point of origin
unipolar
shape of a neuron which has only one
process that includes both the axon and dendrite
upper motor neuron
first neuron in the motor
command pathway with its cell body in the cerebral
cortex that synapses on the lower motor neuron in
the spinal cord
ventricle
central cavity within the brain where CSF is
produced and circulates
voltage-gated channel
ion channel that opens
because of a change in the charge distributed across
the membrane where it is located
white matter
regions of the nervous system
containing mostly myelinated axons, making the
tissue appear white because of the high lipid
content of myelin
12 • Key Terms
485
Chapter Review
12.1 Basic Structure and Function of the
Nervous System
The nervous system can be separated into divisions on
the basis of anatomy and physiology. The anatomical
divisions are the central and peripheral nervous
systems. The CNS is the brain and spinal cord. The PNS
is everything else. Functionally, the nervous system can
be divided into those regions that are responsible for
sensation, those that are responsible for integration,
and those that are responsible for generating
responses. All of these functional areas are found in
both the central and peripheral anatomy.
Considering the anatomical regions of the nervous
system, there are specific names for the structures
within each division. A localized collection of neuron
cell bodies is referred to as a nucleus in the CNS and as
a ganglion in the PNS. A bundle of axons is referred to
as a tract in the CNS and as a nerve in the PNS.
Whereas nuclei and ganglia are specifically in the
central or peripheral divisions, axons can cross the
boundary between the two. A single axon can be part
of a nerve and a tract. The name for that specific
structure depends on its location.
Nervous tissue can also be described as gray matter
and white matter on the basis of its appearance in
unstained tissue. These descriptions are more often
used in the CNS. Gray matter is where nuclei are found
and white matter is where tracts are found. In the PNS,
ganglia are basically gray matter and nerves are white
matter.
The nervous system can also be divided on the basis of
how it controls the body. The somatic nervous system
(SNS) is responsible for functions that result in moving
skeletal muscles. Any sensory or integrative functions
that result in the movement of skeletal muscle would
be considered somatic. The autonomic nervous system
(ANS) is responsible for functions that affect cardiac or
smooth muscle tissue, or that cause glands to produce
their secretions. Autonomic functions are distributed
between central and peripheral regions of the nervous
system. The sensations that lead to autonomic
functions can be the same sensations that are part of
initiating somatic responses. Somatic and autonomic
integrative functions may overlap as well.
A special division of the nervous system is the enteric
nervous system, which is responsible for controlling
the digestive organs. Parts of the autonomic nervous
system overlap with the enteric nervous system. The
enteric nervous system is exclusively found in the
periphery because it is the nervous tissue in the organs
of the digestive system.
12.2 Nervous Tissue
Nervous tissue contains two major cell types, neurons
and glial cells. Neurons are the cells responsible for
communication through electrical signals. Glial cells
are supporting cells, maintaining the environment
around the neurons.
Neurons are polarized cells, based on the flow of
electrical signals along their membrane. Signals are
received at the dendrites, are passed along the cell
body, and propagate along the axon towards the target,
which may be another neuron, muscle tissue, or a
gland. Many axons are insulated by a lipid-rich
substance called myelin. Specific types of glial cells
provide this insulation.
Several types of glial cells are found in the nervous
system, and they can be categorized by the anatomical
division in which they are found. In the CNS,
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and
ependymal cells are found. Astrocytes are important
for maintaining the chemical environment around the
neuron and are crucial for regulating the blood-brain
barrier. Oligodendrocytes are the myelinating glia in the
CNS. Microglia act as phagocytes and play a role in
immune surveillance. Ependymal cells are responsible
for filtering the blood to produce cerebrospinal fluid,
which is a circulatory fluid that performs some of the
functions of blood in the brain and spinal cord because
of the BBB. In the PNS, satellite cells are supporting
cells for the neurons, and Schwann cells insulate
peripheral axons.
12.3 The Function of Nervous Tissue
Sensation starts with the activation of a sensory
ending, such as the thermoreceptor in the skin sensing
the temperature of the water. The sensory endings in
the skin initiate an electrical signal that travels along
the sensory axon within a nerve into the spinal cord,
where it synapses with a neuron in the gray matter of
the spinal cord. The temperature information
represented in that electrical signal is passed to the
next neuron by a chemical signal that diffuses across
the small gap of the synapse and initiates a new
electrical signal in the target cell. That signal travels
through the sensory pathway to the brain, passing
through the thalamus, where conscious perception of
the water temperature is made possible by the
cerebral cortex. Following integration of that
information with other cognitive processes and sensory
486
12 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
information, the brain sends a command back down to
the spinal cord to initiate a motor response by
controlling a skeletal muscle. The motor pathway is
composed of two cells, the upper motor neuron and
the lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron has
its cell body in the cerebral cortex and synapses on a
cell in the gray matter of the spinal cord. The lower
motor neuron is that cell in the gray matter of the
spinal cord and its axon extends into the periphery
where it synapses with a skeletal muscle in a
neuromuscular junction.
12.4 The Action Potential
The nervous system is characterized by electrical
signals that are sent from one area to another. Whether
those areas are close or very far apart, the signal must
travel along an axon. The basis of the electrical signal is
the controlled distribution of ions across the
membrane. Transmembrane ion channels regulate
when ions can move in or out of the cell, so that a
precise signal is generated. This signal is the action
potential which has a very characteristic shape based
on voltage changes across the membrane in a given
time period.
The membrane is normally at rest with established Na+
and K+ concentrations on either side. A stimulus will
start the depolarization of the membrane, and voltage-
gated channels will result in further depolarization
followed by repolarization of the membrane. A slight
overshoot of hyperpolarization marks the end of the
action potential. While an action potential is in
progress, another cannot be generated under the same
conditions. While the voltage-gated Na+ channel is
inactivated, absolutely no action potentials can be
generated. Once that channel has returned to its
resting state, a new action potential is possible, but it
must be started by a relatively stronger stimulus to
overcome the K+ leaving the cell.
The action potential travels down the axon as voltage-
gated ion channels are opened by the spreading
depolarization. In unmyelinated axons, this happens in
a continuous fashion because there are voltage-gated
channels throughout the membrane. In myelinated
axons, propagation is described as saltatory because
voltage-gated channels are only found at the nodes of
Ranvier and the electrical events seem to “jump” from
one node to the next. Saltatory conduction is faster
than continuous conduction, meaning that myelinated
axons propagate their signals faster. The diameter of
the axon also makes a difference as ions diffusing
within the cell have less resistance in a wider space.
12.5 Communication Between Neurons
The basis of the electrical signal within a neuron is the
action potential that propagates down the axon. For a
neuron to generate an action potential, it needs to
receive input from another source, either another
neuron or a sensory stimulus. That input will result in
opening ion channels in the neuron, resulting in a
graded potential based on the strength of the stimulus.
Graded potentials can be depolarizing or
hyperpolarizing and can summate to affect the
probability of the neuron reaching threshold.
Graded potentials can be the result of sensory stimuli.
If the sensory stimulus is received by the dendrites of a
unipolar sensory neuron, such as the sensory neuron
ending in the skin, the graded potential is called a
generator potential because it can directly generate
the action potential in the initial segment of the axon. If
the sensory stimulus is received by a specialized
sensory receptor cell, the graded potential is called a
receptor potential. Graded potentials produced by
interactions between neurons at synapses are called
postsynaptic potentials (PSPs). A depolarizing graded
potential at a synapse is called an excitatory PSP, and a
hyperpolarizing graded potential at a synapse is called
an inhibitory PSP.
Synapses are the contacts between neurons, which
can either be chemical or electrical in nature. Chemical
synapses are far more common. At a chemical synapse,
neurotransmitter is released from the presynaptic
element and diffuses across the synaptic cleft. The
neurotransmitter binds to a receptor protein and
causes a change in the postsynaptic membrane (the
PSP). The neurotransmitter must be inactivated or
removed from the synaptic cleft so that the stimulus is
limited in time.
The particular characteristics of a synapse vary based
on the neurotransmitter system produced by that
neuron. The cholinergic system is found at the
neuromuscular junction and in certain places within
the nervous system. Amino acids, such as glutamate,
glycine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) are
used as neurotransmitters. Other neurotransmitters
are the result of amino acids being enzymatically
changed, as in the biogenic amines, or being covalently
bonded together, as in the neuropeptides.
12 • Chapter Review
487
Interactive Link Questions
1. In 2003, the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
was awarded to Paul C. Lauterbur and Sir Peter
Mansfield for discoveries related to magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). This is a tool to see the
structures of the body (not just the nervous system)
that depends on magnetic fields associated with
certain atomic nuclei. The utility of this technique in
the nervous system is that fat tissue and water
appear as different shades between black and
white. Because white matter is fatty (from myelin)
and gray matter is not, they can be easily
distinguished in MRI images. Visit the Nobel Prize
website (http://openstax.org/l/nobel_2) to play an
interactive game that demonstrates the use of this
technology and compares it with other types of
imaging technologies. Also, the results from an MRI
session are compared with images obtained from x-
ray or computed tomography. How do the imaging
techniques shown in this game indicate the
separation of white and gray matter compared with
the freshly dissected tissue shown earlier?
2. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/troublewstairs)
to read about a woman that notices that her
daughter is having trouble walking up the stairs.
This leads to the discovery of a hereditary condition
that affects the brain and spinal cord. The
electromyography and MRI tests indicated
deficiencies in the spinal cord and cerebellum, both
of which are responsible for controlling coordinated
movements. To what functional division of the
nervous system would these structures belong?
3. The neurons are dynamic cells with the ability to
make a vast number of connections and to respond
incredibly quickly to stimuli and to initiate
movements based on those stimuli. They are the
focus of intense research as failures in physiology
can lead to devastating illnesses. Why are neurons
only found in animals? Why wouldn’t they be
helpful for plants or microorganisms?
4. View the University of Michigan Webscope
(http://openstax.org/l/nervefiber) to see an electron
micrograph of a cross-section of a myelinated nerve
fiber. The axon contains microtubules and
neurofilaments, bounded by a plasma membrane
known as the axolemma. Outside the plasma
membrane of the axon is the myelin sheath, which
is composed of the tightly wrapped plasma
membrane of a Schwann cell. What aspects of the
cells in this image react with the stain that makes
them the deep, dark, black color, such as the
multiple layers that are the myelin sheath?
5. What happens across the membrane of an
electrically active cell is a dynamic process that is
hard to visualize with static images or through text
descriptions. View this animation
(http://openstax.org/l/dynamic1) to really
understand the process. What is the difference
between the driving force for Na+ and K+? And what
is similar about the movement of these two ions?
6. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/neurolab) to see
a virtual neurophysiology lab, and to observe
electrophysiological processes in the nervous
system, where scientists directly measure the
electrical signals produced by neurons. Often, the
action potentials occur so rapidly that watching a
screen to see them occur is not helpful. A speaker
is powered by the signals recorded from a neuron
and it “pops” each time the neuron fires an action
potential. These action potentials are firing so fast
that it sounds like static on the radio.
Electrophysiologists can recognize the patterns
within that static to understand what is happening.
Why is the leech model used for measuring the
electrical activity of neurons instead of using
humans?
7. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/summation)
to learn about summation. The process of
converting electrical signals to chemical signals and
back requires subtle changes that can result in
transient increases or decreases in membrane
voltage. To cause a lasting change in the target cell,
multiple signals are usually added together, or
summated. Does spatial summation have to happen
all at once, or can the separate signals arrive on the
postsynaptic neuron at slightly different times?
Explain your answer.
8. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/neurotrans)
to learn about the release of a neurotransmitter.
The action potential reaches the end of the axon,
called the axon terminal, and a chemical signal is
released to tell the target cell to do something,
either initiate a new action potential, or to suppress
that activity. In a very short space, the electrical
signal of the action potential is changed into the
chemical signal of a neurotransmitter, and then
back to electrical changes in the target cell
membrane. What is the importance of voltage-
gated calcium channels in the release of
neurotransmitters?
488
12 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
Review Questions
9. Which of the following cavities contains a
component of the central nervous system?
a.
abdominal
b.
pelvic
c.
cranial
d.
thoracic
10. Which structure predominates in the white matter
of the brain?
a.
myelinated axons
b.
neuronal cell bodies
c.
ganglia of the parasympathetic nerves
d.
bundles of dendrites from the enteric nervous
system
11. Which part of a neuron transmits an electrical
signal to a target cell?
a.
dendrites
b.
soma
c.
cell body
d.
axon
12. Which term describes a bundle of axons in the
peripheral nervous system?
a.
nucleus
b.
ganglion
c.
tract
d.
nerve
13. Which functional division of the nervous system
would be responsible for the physiological
changes seen during exercise (e.g., increased
heart rate and sweating)?
a.
somatic
b.
autonomic
c.
enteric
d.
central
14. What type of glial cell provides myelin for the
axons in a tract?
a.
oligodendrocyte
b.
astrocyte
c.
Schwann cell
d.
satellite cell
15. Which part of a neuron contains the nucleus?
a.
dendrite
b.
soma
c.
axon
d.
synaptic end bulb
16. Which of the following substances is least able to
cross the blood-brain barrier?
a.
water
b.
sodium ions
c.
glucose
d.
white blood cells
17. What type of glial cell is the resident macrophage
behind the blood-brain barrier?
a.
microglia
b.
astrocyte
c.
Schwann cell
d.
satellite cell
18. What two types of macromolecules are the main
components of myelin?
a.
carbohydrates and lipids
b.
proteins and nucleic acids
c.
lipids and proteins
d.
carbohydrates and nucleic acids
19. If a thermoreceptor is sensitive to temperature
sensations, what would a chemoreceptor be
sensitive to?
a.
light
b.
sound
c.
molecules
d.
vibration
20. Which of these locations is where the greatest
level of integration is taking place in the example
of testing the temperature of the shower?
a.
skeletal muscle
b.
spinal cord
c.
thalamus
d.
cerebral cortex
21. How long does all the signaling through the
sensory pathway, within the central nervous
system, and through the motor command pathway
take?
a.
1 to 2 minutes
b.
1 to 2 seconds
c.
fraction of a second
d.
varies with graded potential
22. What is the target of an upper motor neuron?
a.
cerebral cortex
b.
lower motor neuron
c.
skeletal muscle
d.
thalamus
12 • Review Questions
489
23. What ion enters a neuron causing depolarization
of the cell membrane?
a.
sodium
b.
chloride
c.
potassium
d.
phosphate
24. Voltage-gated Na+ channels open upon reaching
what state?
a.
resting potential
b.
threshold
c.
repolarization
d.
overshoot
25. What does a ligand-gated channel require in order
to open?
a.
increase in concentration of Na+ ions
b.
binding of a neurotransmitter
c.
increase in concentration of K+ ions
d.
depolarization of the membrane
26. What does a mechanically gated channel respond
to?
a.
physical stimulus
b.
chemical stimulus
c.
increase in resistance
d.
decrease in resistance
27. Which of the following voltages would most likely
be measured during the relative refractory period?
a.
+30 mV
b.
0 mV
c.
-45 mV
d.
-80 mv
28. Which of the following is probably going to
propagate an action potential fastest?
a.
a thin, unmyelinated axon
b.
a thin, myelinated axon
c.
a thick, unmyelinated axon
d.
a thick, myelinated axon
29. How much of a change in the membrane potential
is necessary for the summation of postsynaptic
potentials to result in an action potential being
generated?
a.
+30 mV
b.
+15 mV
c.
+10 mV
d.
-15 mV
30. A channel opens on a postsynaptic membrane
that causes a negative ion to enter the cell. What
type of graded potential is this?
a.
depolarizing
b.
repolarizing
c.
hyperpolarizing
d.
non-polarizing
31. What neurotransmitter is released at the
neuromuscular junction?
a.
norepinephrine
b.
serotonin
c.
dopamine
d.
acetylcholine
32. What type of receptor requires an effector protein
to initiate a signal?
a.
biogenic amine
b.
ionotropic receptor
c.
cholinergic system
d.
metabotropic receptor
33. Which of the following neurotransmitters is
associated with inhibition exclusively?
a.
GABA
b.
acetylcholine
c.
glutamate
d.
norepinephrine
Critical Thinking Questions
34. What responses are generated by the nervous
system when you run on a treadmill? Include an
example of each type of tissue that is under
nervous system control.
35. When eating food, what anatomical and functional
divisions of the nervous system are involved in the
perceptual experience?
36. Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disease
affecting the central nervous system. What type of
cell would be the most likely target of this
disease? Why?
37. Which type of neuron, based on its shape, is best
suited for relaying information directly from one
neuron to another? Explain why.
38. Sensory fibers, or pathways, are referred to as
“afferent.” Motor fibers, or pathways, are referred
to as “efferent.” What can you infer about the
meaning of these two terms (afferent and
efferent) in a structural or anatomical context?
39. If a person has a motor disorder and cannot move
their arm voluntarily, but their muscles have tone,
which motor neuron—upper or lower—is probably
affected? Explain why.
490
12 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
40. What does it mean for an action potential to be an
“all or none” event?
41. The conscious perception of pain is often delayed
because of the time it takes for the sensations to
reach the cerebral cortex. Why would this be the
case based on propagation of the axon potential?
42. If a postsynaptic cell has synapses from five
different cells, and three cause EPSPs and two of
them cause IPSPs, give an example of a series of
depolarizations and hyperpolarizations that would
result in the neuron reaching threshold.
43. Why is the receptor the important element
determining the effect a neurotransmitter has on a
target cell?
12 • Critical Thinking Questions
491
492
12 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 13
Anatomy of the Nervous System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Relate the developmental processes of the embryonic nervous system to the adult structures
•
Name the major regions of the adult nervous system
•
Locate regions of the cerebral cortex on the basis of anatomical landmarks common to all human brains
•
Describe the regions of the spinal cord in cross-section
•
List the cranial nerves in order of anatomical location and provide the central and peripheral connections
•
List the spinal nerves by vertebral region and by which nerve plexus each supplies
The nervous system is responsible for controlling much of the body, both through somatic
(voluntary) and autonomic (involuntary) functions. The structures of the nervous system must be described in detail
to understand how many of these functions are possible. There is a physiological concept known as localization of
function that states that certain structures are specifically responsible for prescribed functions. It is an underlying
concept in all of anatomy and physiology, but the nervous system illustrates the concept very well.
Fresh, unstained nervous tissue can be described as gray or white matter, and within those two types of tissue it can
be very hard to see any detail. However, as specific regions and structures have been described, they were related
to specific functions. Understanding these structures and the functions they perform requires a detailed description
of the anatomy of the nervous system, delving deep into what the central and peripheral structures are.
The place to start this study of the nervous system is the beginning of the individual human life, within the womb.
The embryonic development of the nervous system allows for a simple framework on which progressively more
complicated structures can be built. With this framework in place, a thorough investigation of the nervous system is
possible.
Figure 13.1
Human Nervous System The ability to balance like an acrobat combines functions throughout the nervous system. The
central and peripheral divisions coordinate control of the body using the senses of balance, body position, and touch on the soles of the
feet. (credit: Rhett Sutphin)
13.1 The Embryologic Perspective
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the growth and differentiation of the neural tube
•
Relate the different stages of development to the adult structures of the central nervous system
•
Explain the expansion of the ventricular system of the adult brain from the central canal of the neural tube
•
Describe the connections of the diencephalon and cerebellum on the basis of patterns of embryonic
development
The brain is a complex organ composed of gray parts and white matter, which can be hard to distinguish. Starting
from an embryologic perspective allows you to understand more easily how the parts relate to each other. The
embryonic nervous system begins as a very simple structure—essentially just a straight line, which then gets
increasingly complex. Looking at the development of the nervous system with a couple of early snapshots makes it
easier to understand the whole complex system.
Many structures that appear to be adjacent in the adult brain are not connected, and the connections that exist may
seem arbitrary. But there is an underlying order to the system that comes from how different parts develop. By
following the developmental pattern, it is possible to learn what the major regions of the nervous system are.
The Neural Tube
To begin, a sperm cell and an egg cell fuse to become a fertilized egg. The fertilized egg cell, or zygote, starts
dividing to generate the cells that make up an entire organism. Sixteen days after fertilization, the developing
embryo’s cells belong to one of three germ layers that give rise to the different tissues in the body. The endoderm, or
inner tissue, is responsible for generating the lining tissues of various spaces within the body, such as the mucosae
of the digestive and respiratory systems. The mesoderm, or middle tissue, gives rise to most of the muscle and
connective tissues. Finally the ectoderm, or outer tissue, develops into the integumentary system (the skin) and the
nervous system. It is probably not difficult to see that the outer tissue of the embryo becomes the outer covering of
the body. But how is it responsible for the nervous system?
As the embryo develops, a portion of the ectoderm differentiates into a specialized region of neuroectoderm, which
is the precursor for the tissue of the nervous system. Molecular signals induce cells in this region to differentiate into
the neuroepithelium, forming a neural plate. The cells then begin to change shape, causing the tissue to buckle and
fold inward (Figure 13.2). A neural groove forms, visible as a line along the dorsal surface of the embryo. The ridge-
like edge on either side of the neural groove is referred as the neural fold. As the neural folds come together and
converge, the underlying structure forms into a tube just beneath the ectoderm called the neural tube. Cells from
the neural folds then separate from the ectoderm to form a cluster of cells referred to as the neural crest, which
runs lateral to the neural tube. The neural crest migrates away from the nascent, or embryonic, central nervous
system (CNS) that will form along the neural groove and develops into several parts of the peripheral nervous
system (PNS), including the enteric nervous tissue. Many tissues that are not part of the nervous system also arise
from the neural crest, such as craniofacial cartilage and bone, and melanocytes.
FIGURE 13.2
Early Embryonic Development of Nervous System
The neuroectoderm begins to fold inward to form the neural groove.
494
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
As the two sides of the neural groove converge, they form the neural tube, which lies beneath the ectoderm. The anterior end of the neural
tube will develop into the brain, and the posterior portion will become the spinal cord. The neural crest develops into peripheral structures.
At this point, the early nervous system is a simple, hollow tube. It runs from the anterior end of the embryo to the
posterior end. Beginning at 25 days, the anterior end develops into the brain, and the posterior portion becomes the
spinal cord. This is the most basic arrangement of tissue in the nervous system, and it gives rise to the more
complex structures by the fourth week of development.
Primary Vesicles
As the anterior end of the neural tube starts to develop into the brain, it undergoes a couple of enlargements; the
result is the production of sac-like vesicles. Similar to a child’s balloon animal, the long, straight neural tube begins
to take on a new shape. Three vesicles form at the first stage, which are called primary vesicles. These vesicles are
given names that are based on Greek words, the main root word being enkephalon, which means “brain” (en- =
“inside”; kephalon = “head”). The prefix to each generally corresponds to its position along the length of the
developing nervous system.
The prosencephalon (pros- = “in front”) is the forward-most vesicle, and the term can be loosely translated to
mean forebrain. The mesencephalon (mes- = “middle”) is the next vesicle, which can be called the midbrain. The
third vesicle at this stage is the rhombencephalon. The first part of this word is also the root of the word rhombus,
which is a geometrical figure with four sides of equal length (a square is a rhombus with 90° angles). Whereas
prosencephalon and mesencephalon translate into the English words forebrain and midbrain, there is not a word for
“four-sided-figure-brain.” However, the third vesicle can be called the hindbrain. One way of thinking about how the
brain is arranged is to use these three regions—forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain—which are based on the primary
vesicle stage of development (Figure 13.3a).
Secondary Vesicles
The brain continues to develop, and the vesicles differentiate further (see Figure 13.3b). The three primary vesicles
become five secondary vesicles. The prosencephalon enlarges into two new vesicles called the telencephalon and
the diencephalon. The telecephalon will become the cerebrum. The diencephalon gives rise to several adult
structures; two that will be important are the thalamus and the hypothalamus. In the embryonic diencephalon, a
structure known as the eye cup develops, which will eventually become the retina, the nervous tissue of the eye
called the retina. This is a rare example of nervous tissue developing as part of the CNS structures in the embryo,
but becoming a peripheral structure in the fully formed nervous system.
The mesencephalon does not differentiate into any finer divisions. The midbrain is an established region of the brain
at the primary vesicle stage of development and remains that way. The rest of the brain develops around it and
constitutes a large percentage of the mass of the brain. Dividing the brain into forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain is
useful in considering its developmental pattern, but the midbrain is a small proportion of the entire brain, relatively
speaking.
The rhombencephalon develops into the metencephalon and myelencephalon. The metencephalon corresponds to
the adult structure known as the pons and also gives rise to the cerebellum. The cerebellum (from the Latin meaning
“little brain”) accounts for about 10 percent of the mass of the brain and is an important structure in itself. The most
significant connection between the cerebellum and the rest of the brain is at the pons, because the pons and
cerebellum develop out of the same vesicle. The myelencephalon corresponds to the adult structure known as the
medulla oblongata. The structures that come from the mesencephalon and rhombencephalon, except for the
cerebellum, are collectively considered the brain stem, which specifically includes the midbrain, pons, and medulla.
13.1 • The Embryologic Perspective
495
FIGURE 13.3
Primary and Secondary Vesicle Stages of Development
The embryonic brain develops complexity through
enlargements of the neural tube called vesicles; (a) The primary vesicle stage has three regions, and (b) the secondary vesicle stage has five
regions.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/braindevel) to examine the development of the brain, starting with the
neural tube. As the anterior end of the neural tube develops, it enlarges into the primary vesicles that establish the
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. Those structures continue to develop throughout the rest of embryonic
development and into adolescence. They are the basis of the structure of the fully developed adult brain. How would
you describe the difference in the relative sizes of the three regions of the brain when comparing the early (25th
embryonic day) brain and the adult brain?
Spinal Cord Development
While the brain is developing from the anterior neural tube, the spinal cord is developing from the posterior neural
tube. However, its structure does not differ from the basic layout of the neural tube. It is a long, straight cord with a
small, hollow space down the center. The neural tube is defined in terms of its anterior versus posterior portions,
but it also has a dorsal–ventral dimension. As the neural tube separates from the rest of the ectoderm, the side
closest to the surface is dorsal, and the deeper side is ventral.
As the spinal cord develops, the cells making up the wall of the neural tube proliferate and differentiate into the
neurons and glia of the spinal cord. The dorsal tissues will be associated with sensory functions, and the ventral
tissues will be associated with motor functions.
Relating Embryonic Development to the Adult Brain
Embryonic development can help in understanding the structure of the adult brain because it establishes a
framework on which more complex structures can be built. First, the neural tube establishes the anterior–posterior
dimension of the nervous system, which is called the neuraxis. The embryonic nervous system in mammals can be
said to have a standard arrangement. Humans (and other primates, to some degree) make this complicated by
standing up and walking on two legs. The anterior–posterior dimension of the neuraxis overlays the
superior–inferior dimension of the body. However, there is a major curve between the brain stem and forebrain,
which is called the cephalic flexure. Because of this, the neuraxis starts in an inferior position—the end of the spinal
cord—and ends in an anterior position, the front of the cerebrum. If this is confusing, just imagine a four-legged
animal standing up on two legs. Without the flexure in the brain stem, and at the top of the neck, that animal would
be looking straight up instead of straight in front (Figure 13.4).
496
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.4
Human Neuraxis
The mammalian nervous system is arranged with the neural tube running along an anterior to posterior
axis, from nose to tail for a four-legged animal like a dog. Humans, as two-legged animals, have a bend in the neuraxis between the brain
stem and the diencephalon, along with a bend in the neck, so that the eyes and the face are oriented forward.
In summary, the primary vesicles help to establish the basic regions of the nervous system: forebrain, midbrain, and
hindbrain. These divisions are useful in certain situations, but they are not equivalent regions. The midbrain is small
compared with the hindbrain and particularly the forebrain. The secondary vesicles go on to establish the major
regions of the adult nervous system that will be followed in this text. The telencephalon is the cerebrum, which is
the major portion of the human brain. The diencephalon continues to be referred to by this Greek name, because
there is no better term for it (dia- = “through”). The diencephalon is between the cerebrum and the rest of the
nervous system and can be described as the region through which all projections have to pass between the
cerebrum and everything else. The brain stem includes the midbrain, pons, and medulla, which correspond to the
mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon. The cerebellum, being a large portion of the brain, is
considered a separate region. Table 13.1 connects the different stages of development to the adult structures of the
CNS.
One other benefit of considering embryonic development is that certain connections are more obvious because of
how these adult structures are related. The retina, which began as part of the diencephalon, is primarily connected
to the diencephalon. The eyes are just inferior to the anterior-most part of the cerebrum, but the optic nerve extends
back to the thalamus as the optic tract, with branches into a region of the hypothalamus. There is also a connection
of the optic tract to the midbrain, but the mesencephalon is adjacent to the diencephalon, so that is not difficult to
imagine. The cerebellum originates out of the metencephalon, and its largest white matter connection is to the pons,
also from the metencephalon. There are connections between the cerebellum and both the medulla and midbrain,
which are adjacent structures in the secondary vesicle stage of development. In the adult brain, the cerebellum
seems close to the cerebrum, but there is no direct connection between them.
Another aspect of the adult CNS structures that relates to embryonic development is the ventricles—open spaces
within the CNS where cerebrospinal fluid circulates. They are the remnant of the hollow center of the neural tube.
The four ventricles and the tubular spaces associated with them can be linked back to the hollow center of the
embryonic brain (see Table 13.1).
13.1 • The Embryologic Perspective
497
Stages of Embryonic Development
Neural tube
Primary vesicle
stage
Secondary vesicle
stage
Adult
structures
Ventricles
Anterior neural tube
Prosencephalon
Telencephalon
Cerebrum
Lateral ventricles
Anterior neural tube
Prosencephalon
Diencephalon
Diencephalon
Third ventricle
Anterior neural tube
Mesencephalon
Mesencephalon
Midbrain
Cerebral
aqueduct
Anterior neural tube
Rhombencephalon
Metencephalon
Pons
cerebellum
Fourth ventricle
Anterior neural tube
Rhombencephalon
Myelencephalon
Medulla
Fourth ventricle
Posterior neural
tube
Spinal cord
Central canal
TABLE 13.1
Disorders of the...
Nervous System
Early formation of the nervous system depends on the formation of the neural tube. A groove forms along the
dorsal surface of the embryo, which becomes deeper until its edges meet and close off to form the tube. If this
fails to happen, especially in the posterior region where the spinal cord forms, a developmental defect called
spina bifida occurs. The closing of the neural tube is important for more than just the proper formation of the
nervous system. The surrounding tissues are dependent on the correct development of the tube. The connective
tissues surrounding the CNS can be involved as well.
There are three classes of this disorder: occulta, meningocele, and myelomeningocele (Figure 13.5). The first
type, spina bifida occulta, is the mildest because the vertebral bones do not fully surround the spinal cord, but
the spinal cord itself is not affected. No functional differences may be noticed, which is what the word occulta
means; it is hidden spina bifida. The other two types both involve the formation of a cyst—a fluid-filled sac of the
connective tissues that cover the spinal cord called the meninges. “Meningocele” means that the meninges
protrude through the spinal column but nerves may not be involved and few symptoms are present, though
complications may arise later in life. “Myelomeningocele” means that the meninges protrude and spinal nerves
are involved, and therefore severe neurological symptoms can be present.
Often surgery to close the opening or to remove the cyst is necessary. The earlier that surgery can be performed,
the better the chances of controlling or limiting further damage or infection at the opening. For many children
with meningocele, surgery will alleviate the pain, although they may experience some functional loss. Because
the myelomeningocele form of spina bifida involves more extensive damage to the nervous tissue, neurological
damage may persist, but symptoms can often be handled. Complications of the spinal cord may present later in
life, but overall life expectancy is not reduced.
498
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/whitematter) to learn about the white matter in the cerebrum that develops
during childhood and adolescence. This is a composite of MRI images taken of the brains of people from 5 years of
age through 20 years of age, demonstrating how the cerebrum changes. As the color changes to blue, the ratio of
gray matter to white matter changes. The caption for the video describes it as “less gray matter,” which is another
way of saying “more white matter.” If the brain does not finish developing until approximately 20 years of age, can
teenagers be held responsible for behaving badly?
13.2 The Central Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Name the major regions of the adult brain
•
Describe the connections between the cerebrum and brain stem through the diencephalon, and from those
regions into the spinal cord
•
Recognize the complex connections within the subcortical structures of the basal nuclei
•
Explain the arrangement of gray and white matter in the spinal cord
The brain and the spinal cord are the central nervous system, and they represent the main organs of the nervous
system. The spinal cord is a single structure, whereas the adult brain is described in terms of four major regions: the
cerebrum, the diencephalon, the brain stem, and the cerebellum. A person’s conscious experiences are based on
neural activity in the brain. The regulation of homeostasis is governed by a specialized region in the brain. The
coordination of reflexes depends on the integration of sensory and motor pathways in the spinal cord.
FIGURE 13.5
Spinal Bifida
(a) Spina bifida is a birth defect of the spinal cord caused when the neural tube does not completely
close, but the rest of development continues. The result is the emergence of meninges and neural tissue through the vertebral column.
(b) Fetal myelomeningocele is evident in this ultrasound taken at 21 weeks.
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
499
The Cerebrum
The iconic gray mantle of the human brain, which appears to make up most of the mass of the brain, is the
cerebrum (Figure 13.6). The wrinkled portion is the cerebral cortex, and the rest of the structure is beneath that
outer covering. There is a large separation between the two sides of the cerebrum called the longitudinal fissure. It
separates the cerebrum into two distinct halves, a right and left cerebral hemisphere. Deep within the cerebrum,
the white matter of the corpus callosum provides the major pathway for communication between the two
hemispheres of the cerebral cortex.
FIGURE 13.6
The Cerebrum
The cerebrum is a large component of the CNS in humans, and the most obvious aspect of it is the folded
surface called the cerebral cortex.
Many of the higher neurological functions, such as memory, emotion, and consciousness, are the result of cerebral
function. The complexity of the cerebrum is different across vertebrate species. The cerebrum of the most primitive
vertebrates is not much more than the connection for the sense of smell. In mammals, the cerebrum comprises the
outer gray matter that is the cortex (from the Latin word meaning “bark of a tree”) and several deep nuclei that
belong to three important functional groups. The basal nuclei are responsible for cognitive processing, the most
important function being that associated with planning movements. The basal forebrain contains nuclei that are
important in learning and memory. The limbic cortex is the region of the cerebral cortex that is part of the limbic
system, a collection of structures involved in emotion, memory, and behavior.
Cerebral Cortex
The cerebrum is covered by a continuous layer of gray matter that wraps around either side of the forebrain—the
cerebral cortex. This thin, extensive region of wrinkled gray matter is responsible for the higher functions of the
nervous system. A gyrus (plural = gyri) is the ridge of one of those wrinkles, and a sulcus (plural = sulci) is the
groove between two gyri. The pattern of these folds of tissue indicates specific regions of the cerebral cortex.
The head is limited by the size of the birth canal, and the brain must fit inside the cranial cavity of the skull.
Extensive folding in the cerebral cortex enables more gray matter to fit into this limited space. If the gray matter of
the cortex were peeled off of the cerebrum and laid out flat, its surface area would be roughly equal to one square
meter.
The folding of the cortex maximizes the amount of gray matter in the cranial cavity. During embryonic development,
as the telencephalon expands within the skull, the brain goes through a regular course of growth that results in
everyone’s brain having a similar pattern of folds. The surface of the brain can be mapped on the basis of the
locations of large gyri and sulci. Using these landmarks, the cortex can be separated into four major regions, or lobes
(Figure 13.7). The lateral sulcus that separates the temporal lobe from the other regions is one such landmark.
Superior to the lateral sulcus are the parietal lobe and frontal lobe, which are separated from each other by the
central sulcus. The posterior region of the cortex is the occipital lobe, which has no obvious anatomical border
between it and the parietal or temporal lobes on the lateral surface of the brain. From the medial surface, an
500
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
obvious landmark separating the parietal and occipital lobes is called the parieto-occipital sulcus. The fact that
there is no obvious anatomical border between these lobes is consistent with the functions of these regions being
interrelated.
FIGURE 13.7
Lobes of the Cerebral Cortex
The cerebral cortex is divided into four lobes. Extensive folding increases the surface area
available for cerebral functions.
Different regions of the cerebral cortex can be associated with particular functions, a concept known as localization
of function. In the early 1900s, a German neuroscientist named Korbinian Brodmann performed an extensive study
of the microscopic anatomy—the cytoarchitecture—of the cerebral cortex and divided the cortex into 52 separate
regions on the basis of the histology of the cortex. His work resulted in a system of classification known as
Brodmann’s areas, which is still used today to describe the anatomical distinctions within the cortex (Figure 13.8).
The results from Brodmann’s work on the anatomy align very well with the functional differences within the cortex.
Areas 17 and 18 in the occipital lobe are responsible for primary visual perception. That visual information is
complex, so it is processed in the temporal and parietal lobes as well.
The temporal lobe is associated with primary auditory sensation, known as Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42 in the
superior temporal lobe. Because regions of the temporal lobe are part of the limbic system, memory is an important
function associated with that lobe. Memory is essentially a sensory function; memories are recalled sensations such
as the smell of Mom’s baking or the sound of a barking dog. Even memories of movement are really the memory of
sensory feedback from those movements, such as stretching muscles or the movement of the skin around a joint.
Structures in the temporal lobe are responsible for establishing long-term memory, but the ultimate location of
those memories is usually in the region in which the sensory perception was processed.
The main sensation associated with the parietal lobe is somatosensation, meaning the general sensations
associated with the body. Posterior to the central sulcus is the postcentral gyrus, the primary somatosensory
cortex, which is identified as Brodmann’s areas 1, 2, and 3. All of the tactile senses are processed in this area,
including touch, pressure, tickle, pain, itch, and vibration, as well as more general senses of the body such as
proprioception and kinesthesia, which are the senses of body position and movement, respectively.
Anterior to the central sulcus is the frontal lobe, which is primarily associated with motor functions. The precentral
gyrus is the primary motor cortex. Cells from this region of the cerebral cortex are the upper motor neurons that
instruct cells in the spinal cord to move skeletal muscles. Anterior to this region are a few areas that are associated
with planned movements. The premotor area is responsible for thinking of a movement to be made. The frontal eye
fields are important in eliciting eye movements and in attending to visual stimuli. Broca’s area is responsible for the
production of language, or controlling movements responsible for speech; in the vast majority of people, it is located
only on the left side. Anterior to these regions is the prefrontal lobe, which serves cognitive functions that can be
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
501
the basis of personality, short-term memory, and consciousness. The prefrontal lobotomy is an outdated mode of
treatment for personality disorders (psychiatric conditions) that profoundly affected the personality of the patient.
FIGURE 13.8
Brodmann's Areas of the Cerebral Cortex
Brodmann mapping of functionally distinct regions of the cortex was based
on its cytoarchitecture at a microscopic level.
Subcortical structures
Beneath the cerebral cortex are sets of nuclei known as subcortical nuclei that augment cortical processes. The
nuclei of the basal forebrain serve as the primary location for acetylcholine production, which modulates the overall
activity of the cortex, possibly leading to greater attention to sensory stimuli. Alzheimer’s disease is associated with
a loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. The hippocampus and amygdala are medial-lobe structures that, along
with the adjacent cortex, are involved in long-term memory formation and emotional responses. The basal nuclei
are a set of nuclei in the cerebrum responsible for comparing cortical processing with the general state of activity in
the nervous system to influence the likelihood of movement taking place. For example, while a student is sitting in a
classroom listening to a lecture, the basal nuclei will keep the urge to jump up and scream from actually happening.
(The basal nuclei are also referred to as the basal ganglia, although that is potentially confusing because the term
ganglia is typically used for peripheral structures.)
The major structures of the basal nuclei that control movement are the caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus,
which are located deep in the cerebrum. The caudate is a long nucleus that follows the basic C-shape of the
cerebrum from the frontal lobe, through the parietal and occipital lobes, into the temporal lobe. The putamen is
mostly deep in the anterior regions of the frontal and parietal lobes. Together, the caudate and putamen are called
the striatum. The globus pallidus is a layered nucleus that lies just medial to the putamen; they are called the
lenticular nuclei because they look like curved pieces fitting together like lenses. The globus pallidus has two
subdivisions, the external and internal segments, which are lateral and medial, respectively. These nuclei are
depicted in a frontal section of the brain in Figure 13.9.
502
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.9
Frontal Section of Cerebral Cortex and Basal Nuclei
The major components of the basal nuclei, shown in a frontal
section of the brain, are the caudate (just lateral to the lateral ventricle), the putamen (inferior to the caudate and separated by the large
white-matter structure called the internal capsule), and the globus pallidus (medial to the putamen).
The basal nuclei in the cerebrum are connected with a few more nuclei in the brain stem that together act as a
functional group that forms a motor pathway. Two streams of information processing take place in the basal nuclei.
All input to the basal nuclei is from the cortex into the striatum (Figure 13.10). The direct pathway is the projection
of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus internal segment (GPi) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata
(SNr). The GPi/SNr then projects to the thalamus, which projects back to the cortex. The indirect pathway is the
projection of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus external segment (GPe), then to the subthalamic
nucleus (STN), and finally to GPi/SNr. The two streams both target the GPi/SNr, but one has a direct projection and
the other goes through a few intervening nuclei. The direct pathway causes the disinhibition of the thalamus
(inhibition of one cell on a target cell that then inhibits the first cell), whereas the indirect pathway causes, or
reinforces, the normal inhibition of the thalamus. The thalamus then can either excite the cortex (as a result of the
direct pathway) or fail to excite the cortex (as a result of the indirect pathway).
FIGURE 13.10
Connections of Basal Nuclei
Input to the basal nuclei is from the cerebral cortex, which is an excitatory connection
releasing glutamate as a neurotransmitter. This input is to the striatum, or the caudate and putamen. In the direct pathway, the striatum
projects to the internal segment of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (GPi/SNr). This is an inhibitory pathway, in
which GABA is released at the synapse, and the target cells are hyperpolarized and less likely to fire. The output from the basal nuclei is to
the thalamus, which is an inhibitory projection using GABA. The diagram also includes the substantia nigra compacta (SNc), globus pallidus
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
503
external segment (GPe), and subthalamic nucleus (STN).
The switch between the two pathways is the substantia nigra pars compacta, which projects to the striatum and
releases the neurotransmitter dopamine. Dopamine receptors are either excitatory (D1-type receptors) or inhibitory
(D2-type receptors). The direct pathway is activated by dopamine, and the indirect pathway is inhibited by
dopamine. When the substantia nigra pars compacta is firing, it signals to the basal nuclei that the body is in an
active state, and movement will be more likely. When the substantia nigra pars compacta is silent, the body is in a
passive state, and movement is inhibited. To illustrate this situation, while a student is sitting listening to a lecture,
the substantia nigra pars compacta would be silent and the student less likely to get up and walk around. Likewise,
while the professor is lecturing, and walking around at the front of the classroom, the professor’s substantia nigra
pars compacta would be active, in keeping with their activity level.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/basalnuclei1) to learn about the basal nuclei (also known as the basal
ganglia), which have two pathways that process information within the cerebrum. As shown in this video, the direct
pathway is the shorter pathway through the system that results in increased activity in the cerebral cortex and
increased motor activity. The direct pathway is described as resulting in “disinhibition” of the thalamus. What does
disinhibition mean? What are the two neurons doing individually to cause this?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/basalnuclei2) to learn about the basal nuclei (also known as the basal
ganglia), which have two pathways that process information within the cerebrum. As shown in this video, the
indirect pathway is the longer pathway through the system that results in decreased activity in the cerebral cortex,
and therefore less motor activity. The indirect pathway has an extra couple of connections in it, including
disinhibition of the subthalamic nucleus. What is the end result on the thalamus, and therefore on movement
initiated by the cerebral cortex?
The Diencephalon
The diencephalon is the one region of the adult brain that retains its name from embryologic development. The
etymology of the word diencephalon translates to “through brain.” It is the connection between the cerebrum and
Everyday Connection
The Myth of Left Brain/Right Brain
There is a persistent myth that people are “right-brained” or “left-brained,” which is an oversimplification of an
important concept about the cerebral hemispheres. There is some lateralization of function, in which the left
side of the brain is devoted to language function and the right side is devoted to spatial and nonverbal reasoning.
Whereas these functions are predominantly associated with those sides of the brain, there is no monopoly by
either side on these functions. Many pervasive functions, such as language, are distributed globally around the
cerebrum.
Some of the support for this misconception has come from studies of split brains. A drastic way to deal with a
rare and devastating neurological condition (intractable epilepsy) is to separate the two hemispheres of the
brain. After sectioning the corpus callosum, a split-brained patient will have trouble producing verbal responses
on the basis of sensory information processed on the right side of the cerebrum, leading to the idea that the left
side is responsible for language function.
However, there are well-documented cases of language functions lost from damage to the right side of the brain.
The deficits seen in damage to the left side of the brain are classified as aphasia, a loss of speech function;
damage on the right side can affect the use of language. Right-side damage can result in a loss of ability to
understand figurative aspects of speech, such as jokes, irony, or metaphors. Nonverbal aspects of speech can be
affected by damage to the right side, such as facial expression or body language, and right-side damage can lead
to a “flat affect” in speech, or a loss of emotional expression in speech—sounding like a robot when talking.
504
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
the rest of the nervous system, with one exception. The rest of the brain, the spinal cord, and the PNS all send
information to the cerebrum through the diencephalon. Output from the cerebrum passes through the
diencephalon. The single exception is the system associated with olfaction, or the sense of smell, which connects
directly with the cerebrum. In the earliest vertebrate species, the cerebrum was not much more than olfactory bulbs
that received peripheral information about the chemical environment (to call it smell in these organisms is imprecise
because they lived in the ocean).
The diencephalon is deep beneath the cerebrum and constitutes the walls of the third ventricle. The diencephalon
can be described as any region of the brain with “thalamus” in its name. The two major regions of the diencephalon
are the thalamus itself and the hypothalamus (Figure 13.11). There are other structures, such as the epithalamus,
which contains the pineal gland, or the subthalamus, which includes the subthalamic nucleus that is part of the
basal nuclei.
Thalamus
The thalamus is a collection of nuclei that relay information between the cerebral cortex and the periphery, spinal
cord, or brain stem. All sensory information, except for the sense of smell, passes through the thalamus before
processing by the cortex. Axons from the peripheral sensory organs, or intermediate nuclei, synapse in the
thalamus, and thalamic neurons project directly to the cerebrum. It is a requisite synapse in any sensory pathway,
except for olfaction. The thalamus does not just pass the information on, it also processes that information. For
example, the portion of the thalamus that receives visual information will influence what visual stimuli are
important, or what receives attention.
The cerebrum also sends information down to the thalamus, which usually communicates motor commands. This
involves interactions with the cerebellum and other nuclei in the brain stem. The cerebrum interacts with the basal
nuclei, which involves connections with the thalamus. The primary output of the basal nuclei is to the thalamus,
which relays that output to the cerebral cortex. The cortex also sends information to the thalamus that will then
influence the effects of the basal nuclei.
Hypothalamus
Inferior and slightly anterior to the thalamus is the hypothalamus, the other major region of the diencephalon. The
hypothalamus is a collection of nuclei that are largely involved in regulating homeostasis. The hypothalamus is the
executive region in charge of the autonomic nervous system and the endocrine system through its regulation of the
anterior pituitary gland. Other parts of the hypothalamus are involved in memory and emotion as part of the limbic
system.
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
505
FIGURE 13.11
The Diencephalon
The diencephalon is composed primarily of the thalamus and hypothalamus, which together define
the walls of the third ventricle. The thalami are two elongated, ovoid structures on either side of the midline that make contact in the
middle. The hypothalamus is inferior and anterior to the thalamus, culminating in a sharp angle to which the pituitary gland is attached.
Brain Stem
The midbrain and hindbrain (composed of the pons and the medulla) are collectively referred to as the brain stem
(Figure 13.12). The structure emerges from the ventral surface of the forebrain as a tapering cone that connects the
brain to the spinal cord. Attached to the brain stem, but considered a separate region of the adult brain, is the
cerebellum. The midbrain coordinates sensory representations of the visual, auditory, and somatosensory
perceptual spaces. The pons is the main connection with the cerebellum. The pons and the medulla regulate several
crucial functions, including the cardiovascular and respiratory systems and rates.
The cranial nerves connect through the brain stem and provide the brain with the sensory input and motor output
associated with the head and neck, including most of the special senses. The major ascending and descending
pathways between the spinal cord and brain, specifically the cerebrum, pass through the brain stem.
506
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.12
The Brain Stem
The brain stem comprises three regions: the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla.
Midbrain
One of the original regions of the embryonic brain, the midbrain is a small region between the thalamus and pons. It
is separated into the tectum and tegmentum, from the Latin words for roof and floor, respectively. The cerebral
aqueduct passes through the center of the midbrain, such that these regions are the roof and floor of that canal.
The tectum is composed of four bumps known as the colliculi (singular = colliculus), which means “little hill” in
Latin. The inferior colliculus is the inferior pair of these enlargements and is part of the auditory brain stem
pathway. Neurons of the inferior colliculus project to the thalamus, which then sends auditory information to the
cerebrum for the conscious perception of sound. The superior colliculus is the superior pair and combines sensory
information about visual space, auditory space, and somatosensory space. Activity in the superior colliculus is
related to orienting the eyes to a sound or touch stimulus. If you are walking along the sidewalk on campus and you
hear chirping, the superior colliculus coordinates that information with your awareness of the visual location of the
tree right above you. That is the correlation of auditory and visual maps. If you suddenly feel something wet fall on
your head, your superior colliculus integrates that with the auditory and visual maps and you know that the chirping
bird just relieved itself on you. You want to look up to see the culprit, but do not.
The tegmentum is continuous with the gray matter of the rest of the brain stem. Throughout the midbrain, pons, and
medulla, the tegmentum contains the nuclei that receive and send information through the cranial nerves, as well as
regions that regulate important functions such as those of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
Pons
The word pons comes from the Latin word for bridge. It is visible on the anterior surface of the brain stem as the
thick bundle of white matter attached to the cerebellum. The pons is the main connection between the cerebellum
and the brain stem. The bridge-like white matter is only the anterior surface of the pons; the gray matter beneath
that is a continuation of the tegmentum from the midbrain. Gray matter in the tegmentum region of the pons
contains neurons receiving descending input from the forebrain that is sent to the cerebellum.
Medulla
The medulla is the region known as the myelencephalon in the embryonic brain. The initial portion of the name,
“myel,” refers to the significant white matter found in this region—especially on its exterior, which is continuous with
the white matter of the spinal cord. The tegmentum of the midbrain and pons continues into the medulla because
this gray matter is responsible for processing cranial nerve information. A diffuse region of gray matter throughout
the brain stem, known as the reticular formation, is related to sleep and wakefulness, such as general brain activity
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
507
and attention.
The Cerebellum
The cerebellum, as the name suggests, is the “little brain.” It is covered in gyri and sulci like the cerebrum, and
looks like a miniature version of that part of the brain (Figure 13.13). The cerebellum is largely responsible for
comparing information from the cerebrum with sensory feedback from the periphery through the spinal cord. It
accounts for approximately 10 percent of the mass of the brain.
FIGURE 13.13
The Cerebellum
The cerebellum is situated on the posterior surface of the brain stem. Descending input from the
cerebellum enters through the large white matter structure of the pons. Ascending input from the periphery and spinal cord enters through
the fibers of the inferior olive. Output goes to the midbrain, which sends a descending signal to the spinal cord.
Descending fibers from the cerebrum have branches that connect to neurons in the pons. Those neurons project
into the cerebellum, providing a copy of motor commands sent to the spinal cord. Sensory information from the
periphery, which enters through spinal or cranial nerves, is copied to a nucleus in the medulla known as the inferior
olive. Fibers from this nucleus enter the cerebellum and are compared with the descending commands from the
cerebrum. If the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe sends a command down to the spinal cord to initiate
walking, a copy of that instruction is sent to the cerebellum. Sensory feedback from the muscles and joints,
proprioceptive information about the movements of walking, and sensations of balance are sent to the cerebellum
through the inferior olive and the cerebellum compares them. If walking is not coordinated, perhaps because the
ground is uneven or a strong wind is blowing, then the cerebellum sends out a corrective command to compensate
for the difference between the original cortical command and the sensory feedback. The output of the cerebellum is
into the midbrain, which then sends a descending input to the spinal cord to correct the messages going to skeletal
muscles.
508
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
The Spinal Cord
The description of the CNS is concentrated on the structures of the brain, but the spinal cord is another major organ
of the system. Whereas the brain develops out of expansions of the neural tube into primary and then secondary
vesicles, the spinal cord maintains the tube structure and is only specialized into certain regions. As the spinal cord
continues to develop in the newborn, anatomical features mark its surface. The anterior midline is marked by the
anterior median fissure, and the posterior midline is marked by the posterior median sulcus. Axons enter the
posterior side through the dorsal (posterior) nerve root, which marks the posterolateral sulcus on either side. The
axons emerging from the anterior side do so through the ventral (anterior) nerve root. Note that it is common to
see the terms dorsal (dorsal = “back”) and ventral (ventral = “belly”) used interchangeably with posterior and
anterior, particularly in reference to nerves and the structures of the spinal cord. You should learn to be comfortable
with both.
On the whole, the posterior regions are responsible for sensory functions and the anterior regions are associated
with motor functions. This comes from the initial development of the spinal cord, which is divided into the basal
plate and the alar plate. The basal plate is closest to the ventral midline of the neural tube, which will become the
anterior face of the spinal cord and gives rise to motor neurons. The alar plate is on the dorsal side of the neural
tube and gives rise to neurons that will receive sensory input from the periphery.
The length of the spinal cord is divided into regions that correspond to the regions of the vertebral column. The
name of a spinal cord region corresponds to the level at which spinal nerves pass through the intervertebral
foramina. Immediately adjacent to the brain stem is the cervical region, followed by the thoracic, then the lumbar,
and finally the sacral region. The spinal cord is not the full length of the vertebral column because the spinal cord
does not grow significantly longer after the first or second year, but the skeleton continues to grow. The nerves that
emerge from the spinal cord pass through the intervertebral foramina at the respective levels. As the vertebral
column grows, these nerves grow with it and result in a long bundle of nerves that resembles a horse’s tail and is
named the cauda equina. The sacral spinal cord is at the level of the upper lumbar vertebral bones. The spinal
nerves extend from their various levels to the proper level of the vertebral column.
Gray Horns
In cross-section, the gray matter of the spinal cord has the appearance of an ink-blot test, with the spread of the
gray matter on one side replicated on the other—a shape reminiscent of a bulbous capital “H.” As shown in Figure
13.14, the gray matter is subdivided into regions that are referred to as horns. The posterior horn is responsible for
sensory processing. The anterior horn sends out motor signals to the skeletal muscles. The lateral horn, which is
only found in the thoracic, upper lumbar, and sacral regions, contains cell bodies of motor neurons of the autonomic
nervous system.
Some of the largest neurons of the spinal cord are the multipolar motor neurons in the anterior horn. The fibers that
cause contraction of skeletal muscles are the axons of these neurons. The motor neuron that causes contraction of
the big toe, for example, is located in the sacral spinal cord. The axon that has to reach all the way to the belly of
that muscle may be a meter in length. The neuronal cell body that maintains that long fiber must be quite large,
possibly several hundred micrometers in diameter, making it one of the largest cells in the body.
13.2 • The Central Nervous System
509
FIGURE 13.14
Cross-section of Spinal Cord
The cross-section of a thoracic spinal cord segment shows the posterior, anterior, and
lateral horns of gray matter, as well as the posterior, anterior, and lateral columns of white matter. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
White Columns
Just as the gray matter is separated into horns, the white matter of the spinal cord is separated into columns.
Ascending tracts of nervous system fibers in these columns carry sensory information up to the brain, whereas
descending tracts carry motor commands from the brain. Looking at the spinal cord longitudinally, the columns
extend along its length as continuous bands of white matter. Between the two posterior horns of gray matter are the
posterior columns. Between the two anterior horns, and bounded by the axons of motor neurons emerging from
that gray matter area, are the anterior columns. The white matter on either side of the spinal cord, between the
posterior horn and the axons of the anterior horn neurons, are the lateral columns. The posterior columns are
composed of axons of ascending tracts. The anterior and lateral columns are composed of many different groups of
axons of both ascending and descending tracts—the latter carrying motor commands down from the brain to the
spinal cord to control output to the periphery.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/graymatter) to learn about the gray matter of the spinal cord that receives
input from fibers of the dorsal (posterior) root and sends information out through the fibers of the ventral (anterior)
root. As discussed in this video, these connections represent the interactions of the CNS with peripheral structures
for both sensory and motor functions. The cervical and lumbar spinal cords have enlargements as a result of larger
populations of neurons. What are these enlargements responsible for?
Disorders of the...
Basal Nuclei
Parkinson’s disease is a disorder of the basal nuclei, specifically of the substantia nigra, that demonstrates the
510
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/parkinsons) for a thorough explanation of Parkinson’s disease.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Compared with the nearest evolutionary relative, the chimpanzee, the human has a brain that is huge. At a point in
the past, a common ancestor gave rise to the two species of humans and chimpanzees. That evolutionary history is
long and is still an area of intense study. But something happened to increase the size of the human brain relative to
the chimpanzee. Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/hugebrain) in which the author explores the current
understanding of why this happened.
According to one hypothesis about the expansion of brain size, what tissue might have been sacrificed so energy
was available to grow our larger brain? Based on what you know about that tissue and nervous tissue, why would
there be a trade-off between them in terms of energy use?
13.3 Circulation and the Central Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the vessels that supply the CNS with blood
•
Name the components of the ventricular system and the regions of the brain in which each is located
•
Explain the production of cerebrospinal fluid and its flow through the ventricles
•
Explain how a disruption in circulation would result in a stroke
The CNS is crucial to the operation of the body, and any compromise in the brain and spinal cord can lead to severe
difficulties. The CNS has a privileged blood supply, as suggested by the blood-brain barrier. The function of the
tissue in the CNS is crucial to the survival of the organism, so the contents of the blood cannot simply pass into the
central nervous tissue. To protect this region from the toxins and pathogens that may be traveling through the blood
stream, there is strict control over what can move out of the general systems and into the brain and spinal cord.
Because of this privilege, the CNS needs specialized structures for the maintenance of circulation. This begins with a
unique arrangement of blood vessels carrying fresh blood into the CNS. Beyond the supply of blood, the CNS filters
that blood into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is then circulated through the cavities of the brain and spinal cord
called ventricles.
Blood Supply to the Brain
A lack of oxygen to the CNS can be devastating, and the cardiovascular system has specific regulatory reflexes to
ensure that the blood supply is not interrupted. There are multiple routes for blood to get into the CNS, with
specializations to protect that blood supply and to maximize the ability of the brain to get an uninterrupted
perfusion.
effects of the direct and indirect pathways. Parkinson’s disease is the result of neurons in the substantia nigra
pars compacta dying. These neurons release dopamine into the striatum. Without that modulatory influence, the
basal nuclei are stuck in the indirect pathway, without the direct pathway being activated. The direct pathway is
responsible for increasing cortical movement commands. The increased activity of the indirect pathway results
in the hypokinetic disorder of Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinson’s disease is neurodegenerative, meaning that neurons die that cannot be replaced, so there is no cure
for the disorder. Treatments for Parkinson’s disease are aimed at increasing dopamine levels in the striatum.
Currently, the most common way of doing that is by providing the amino acid L-DOPA, which is a precursor to the
neurotransmitter dopamine and can cross the blood-brain barrier. With levels of the precursor elevated, the
remaining cells of the substantia nigra pars compacta can make more neurotransmitter and have a greater
effect. Unfortunately, the patient will become less responsive to L-DOPA treatment as time progresses, and it
can cause increased dopamine levels elsewhere in the brain, which are associated with psychosis or
schizophrenia.
13.3 • Circulation and the Central Nervous System
511
Arterial Supply
The major artery carrying recently oxygenated blood away from the heart is the aorta. The very first branches off the
aorta supply the heart with nutrients and oxygen. The next branches give rise to the common carotid arteries,
which further branch into the internal carotid arteries. The external carotid arteries supply blood to the tissues on
the surface of the cranium. The bases of the common carotids contain stretch receptors that immediately respond
to the drop in blood pressure upon standing. The orthostatic reflex is a reaction to this change in body position, so
that blood pressure is maintained against the increasing effect of gravity (orthostatic means “standing up”). Heart
rate increases—a reflex of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system—and this raises blood
pressure.
The internal carotid artery enters the cranium through the carotid canal in the temporal bone. A second set of
vessels that supply the CNS are the vertebral arteries, which are protected as they pass through the neck region by
the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. The vertebral arteries enter the cranium through the foramen
magnum of the occipital bone. Branches off the left and right vertebral arteries merge into the anterior spinal
artery supplying the anterior aspect of the spinal cord, found along the anterior median fissure. The two vertebral
arteries then merge into the basilar artery, which gives rise to branches to the brain stem and cerebellum. The left
and right internal carotid arteries and branches of the basilar artery all become the circle of Willis, a confluence of
arteries that can maintain perfusion of the brain even if narrowing or a blockage limits flow through one part (Figure
13.15).
FIGURE 13.15
Circle of Willis
The blood supply to the brain enters through the internal carotid arteries and the vertebral arteries,
eventually giving rise to the circle of Willis.
512
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/bloodflow1) to see how blood flows to the brain and passes through the
circle of Willis before being distributed through the cerebrum. The circle of Willis is a specialized arrangement of
arteries that ensure constant perfusion of the cerebrum even in the event of a blockage of one of the arteries in the
circle. The animation shows the normal direction of flow through the circle of Willis to the middle cerebral artery.
Where would the blood come from if there were a blockage just posterior to the middle cerebral artery on the left?
Venous Return
After passing through the CNS, blood returns to the circulation through a series of dural sinuses and veins (Figure
13.16). The superior sagittal sinus runs in the groove of the longitudinal fissure, where it absorbs CSF from the
meninges. The superior sagittal sinus drains to the confluence of sinuses, along with the occipital sinuses and
straight sinus, to then drain into the transverse sinuses. The transverse sinuses connect to the sigmoid sinuses,
which then connect to the jugular veins. From there, the blood continues toward the heart to be pumped to the
lungs for reoxygenation.
FIGURE 13.16
Dural Sinuses and Veins
Blood drains from the brain through a series of sinuses that connect to the jugular veins.
Protective Coverings of the Brain and Spinal Cord
The outer surface of the CNS is covered by a series of membranes composed of connective tissue called the
meninges, which protect the brain. The dura mater is a thick fibrous layer and a strong protective sheath over the
entire brain and spinal cord. It is anchored to the inner surface of the cranium and vertebral cavity. The arachnoid
mater is a membrane of thin fibrous tissue that forms a loose sac around the CNS. Beneath the arachnoid is a thin,
filamentous mesh called the arachnoid trabeculae, which looks like a spider web, giving this layer its name. Directly
adjacent to the surface of the CNS is the pia mater, a thin fibrous membrane that follows the convolutions of gyri
and sulci in the cerebral cortex and fits into other grooves and indentations (Figure 13.17).
13.3 • Circulation and the Central Nervous System
513
FIGURE 13.17
Meningeal Layers of Superior Sagittal Sinus
The layers of the meninges in the longitudinal fissure of the superior
sagittal sinus are shown, with the dura mater adjacent to the inner surface of the cranium, the pia mater adjacent to the surface of the
brain, and the arachnoid and subarachnoid space between them. An arachnoid villus is shown emerging into the dural sinus to allow CSF to
filter back into the blood for drainage.
Dura Mater
Like a thick cap covering the brain, the dura mater is a tough outer covering. The name comes from the Latin for
“tough mother” to represent its physically protective role. It encloses the entire CNS and the major blood vessels
that enter the cranium and vertebral cavity. It is directly attached to the inner surface of the bones of the cranium
and to the very end of the vertebral cavity.
There are infoldings of the dura that fit into large crevasses of the brain. Two infoldings go through the midline
separations of the cerebrum and cerebellum; one forms a shelf-like tent between the occipital lobes of the
cerebrum and the cerebellum, and the other surrounds the pituitary gland. The dura also surrounds and supports
the venous sinuses.
Arachnoid Mater
The middle layer of the meninges is the arachnoid, named for the spider-web–like trabeculae between it and the pia
mater. The arachnoid defines a sac-like enclosure around the CNS. The trabeculae are found in the subarachnoid
space, which is filled with circulating CSF. The arachnoid emerges into the dural sinuses as the arachnoid
granulations, where the CSF is filtered back into the blood for drainage from the nervous system.
The subarachnoid space is filled with circulating CSF, which also provides a liquid cushion to the brain and spinal
cord. Similar to clinical blood work, a sample of CSF can be withdrawn to find chemical evidence of neuropathology
or metabolic traces of the biochemical functions of nervous tissue.
Pia Mater
The outer surface of the CNS is covered in the thin fibrous membrane of the pia mater. It is thought to have a
continuous layer of cells providing a fluid-impermeable membrane. The name pia mater comes from the Latin for
“tender mother,” suggesting the thin membrane is a gentle covering for the brain. The pia extends into every
convolution of the CNS, lining the inside of the sulci in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices. At the end of the spinal
cord, a thin filament extends from the inferior end of CNS at the upper lumbar region of the vertebral column to the
sacral end of the vertebral column. Because the spinal cord does not extend through the lower lumbar region of the
vertebral column, a needle can be inserted through the dura and arachnoid layers to withdraw CSF. This procedure
is called a lumbar puncture and avoids the risk of damaging the central tissue of the spinal cord. Blood vessels that
are nourishing the central nervous tissue are between the pia mater and the nervous tissue.
514
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/lumbarpuncture) that describes the procedure known as the lumbar
puncture, a medical procedure used to sample the CSF. Because of the anatomy of the CNS, it is a relative safe
location to insert a needle. Why is the lumbar puncture performed in the lower lumbar area of the vertebral column?
The Ventricular System
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) circulates throughout and around the CNS. In other tissues, water and small molecules are
filtered through capillaries as the major contributor to the interstitial fluid. In the brain, CSF is produced in special
structures to perfuse through the nervous tissue of the CNS and is continuous with the interstitial fluid. Specifically,
CSF circulates to remove metabolic wastes from the interstitial fluids of nervous tissues and return them to the
blood stream. The ventricles are the open spaces within the brain where CSF circulates. In some of these spaces,
CSF is produced by filtering of the blood that is performed by a specialized membrane known as a choroid plexus.
The CSF circulates through all of the ventricles to eventually emerge into the subarachnoid space where it will be
reabsorbed into the blood.
The Ventricles
There are four ventricles within the brain, all of which developed from the original hollow space within the neural
tube, the central canal. The first two are named the lateral ventricles and are deep within the cerebrum. These
ventricles are connected to the third ventricle by two openings called the interventricular foramina. The third
ventricle is the space between the left and right sides of the diencephalon, which opens into the cerebral aqueduct
that passes through the midbrain. The aqueduct opens into the fourth ventricle, which is the space between the
cerebellum and the pons and upper medulla (Figure 13.18).
Disorders of the...
Meninges
Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges, the three layers of fibrous membrane that surround the CNS.
Meningitis can be caused by infection by bacteria or viruses. The particular pathogens are not special to
meningitis; it is just an inflammation of that specific set of tissues from what might be a broader infection.
Bacterial meningitis can be caused by Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, or the tuberculosis pathogen, among
many others. Viral meningitis is usually the result of common enteroviruses (such as those that cause intestinal
disorders), but may be the result of the herpes virus or West Nile virus. Bacterial meningitis tends to be more
severe.
The symptoms associated with meningitis can be fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, light sensitivity, soreness of the
neck, or severe headache. More important are the neurological symptoms, such as changes in mental state
(confusion, memory deficits, and other dementia-type symptoms). A serious risk of meningitis can be damage to
peripheral structures because of the nerves that pass through the meninges. Hearing loss is a common result of
meningitis.
The primary test for meningitis is a lumbar puncture. A needle inserted into the lumbar region of the spinal
column through the dura mater and arachnoid membrane into the subarachnoid space can be used to withdraw
the fluid for chemical testing. Fatality occurs in 5 to 40 percent of children and 20 to 50 percent of adults with
bacterial meningitis. Treatment of bacterial meningitis is through antibiotics, but viral meningitis cannot be
treated with antibiotics because viruses do not respond to that type of drug. Fortunately, the viral forms are
milder.
13.3 • Circulation and the Central Nervous System
515
FIGURE 13.18
Cerebrospinal Fluid Circulation
The choroid plexus in the four ventricles produce CSF, which is circulated through the
ventricular system and then enters the subarachnoid space through the median and lateral apertures. The CSF is then reabsorbed into the
blood at the arachnoid granulations, where the arachnoid membrane emerges into the dural sinuses.
As the telencephalon enlarges and grows into the cranial cavity, it is limited by the space within the skull. The
telencephalon is the most anterior region of what was the neural tube, but cannot grow past the limit of the frontal
bone of the skull. Because the cerebrum fits into this space, it takes on a C-shaped formation, through the frontal,
parietal, occipital, and finally temporal regions. The space within the telencephalon is stretched into this same C-
shape. The two ventricles are in the left and right sides, and were at one time referred to as the first and second
ventricles. The interventricular foramina connect the frontal region of the lateral ventricles with the third ventricle.
The third ventricle is the space bounded by the medial walls of the hypothalamus and thalamus. The two thalami
touch in the center in most brains as the massa intermedia, which is surrounded by the third ventricle. The cerebral
aqueduct opens just inferior to the epithalamus and passes through the midbrain. The tectum and tegmentum of the
midbrain are the roof and floor of the cerebral aqueduct, respectively. The aqueduct opens up into the fourth
ventricle. The floor of the fourth ventricle is the dorsal surface of the pons and upper medulla (that gray matter
making a continuation of the tegmentum of the midbrain). The fourth ventricle then narrows into the central canal of
the spinal cord.
The ventricular system opens up to the subarachnoid space from the fourth ventricle. The single median aperture
and the pair of lateral apertures connect to the subarachnoid space so that CSF can flow through the ventricles and
around the outside of the CNS. Cerebrospinal fluid is produced within the ventricles by a type of specialized
membrane called a choroid plexus. Ependymal cells (one of the types of glial cells described in the introduction to
the nervous system) surround blood capillaries and filter the blood to make CSF. The fluid is a clear solution with a
limited amount of the constituents of blood. It is essentially water, small molecules, and electrolytes. Oxygen and
carbon dioxide are dissolved into the CSF, as they are in blood, and can diffuse between the fluid and the nervous
tissue.
Cerebrospinal Fluid Circulation
The choroid plexuses are found in all four ventricles. Observed in dissection, they appear as soft, fuzzy structures
that may still be pink, depending on how well the circulatory system is cleared in preparation of the tissue. The CSF
is produced from components extracted from the blood, so its flow out of the ventricles is tied to the pulse of
cardiovascular circulation.
From the lateral ventricles, the CSF flows into the third ventricle, where more CSF is produced, and then through the
516
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
cerebral aqueduct into the fourth ventricle where even more CSF is produced. A very small amount of CSF is filtered
at any one of the plexuses, for a total of about 500 milliliters daily, but it is continuously made and pulses through
the ventricular system, keeping the fluid moving. From the fourth ventricle, CSF can continue down the central canal
of the spinal cord, but this is essentially a cul-de-sac, so more of the fluid leaves the ventricular system and moves
into the subarachnoid space through the median and lateral apertures.
Within the subarachnoid space, the CSF flows around all of the CNS, providing two important functions. As with
elsewhere in its circulation, the CSF picks up metabolic wastes from the nervous tissue and moves it out of the CNS.
It also acts as a liquid cushion for the brain and spinal cord. By surrounding the entire system in the subarachnoid
space, it provides a thin buffer around the organs within the strong, protective dura mater. The arachnoid
granulations are outpocketings of the arachnoid membrane into the dural sinuses so that CSF can be reabsorbed
into the blood, along with the metabolic wastes. From the dural sinuses, blood drains out of the head and neck
through the jugular veins, along with the rest of the circulation for blood, to be reoxygenated by the lungs and
wastes to be filtered out by the kidneys (Table 13.2).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/CSFflow) that shows the flow of CSF through the brain and spinal cord,
and how it originates from the ventricles and then spreads into the space within the meninges, where the fluids then
move into the venous sinuses to return to the cardiovascular circulation. What are the structures that produce CSF
and where are they found? How are the structures indicated in this animation?
Components of CSF Circulation
Lateral
ventricles
Third
ventricle
Cerebral
aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Central
canal
Subarachnoid
space
Location in
CNS
Cerebrum
Diencephalon
Midbrain
Between pons/upper
medulla and cerebellum
Spinal
cord
External to
entire CNS
Blood
vessel
structure
Choroid
plexus
Choroid
plexus
None
Choroid plexus
None
Arachnoid
granulations
TABLE 13.2
Disorders of the...
Central Nervous System
The supply of blood to the brain is crucial to its ability to perform many functions. Without a steady supply of
oxygen, and to a lesser extent glucose, the nervous tissue in the brain cannot keep up its extensive electrical
activity. These nutrients get into the brain through the blood, and if blood flow is interrupted, neurological
function is compromised.
The common name for a disruption of blood supply to the brain is a stroke. It is caused by a blockage to an
artery in the brain. The blockage is from some type of embolus: a blood clot, a fat embolus, or an air bubble.
When the blood cannot travel through the artery, the surrounding tissue that is deprived starves and dies.
Strokes will often result in the loss of very specific functions. A stroke in the lateral medulla, for example, can
cause a loss in the ability to swallow. Sometimes, seemingly unrelated functions will be lost because they are
dependent on structures in the same region. Along with the swallowing in the previous example, a stroke in that
region could affect sensory functions from the face or extremities because important white matter pathways
also pass through the lateral medulla. Loss of blood flow to specific regions of the cortex can lead to the loss of
specific higher functions, from the ability to recognize faces to the ability to move a particular region of the body.
13.3 • Circulation and the Central Nervous System
517
13.4 The Peripheral Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structures found in the PNS
•
Distinguish between somatic and autonomic structures, including the special peripheral structures of the
enteric nervous system
•
Name the twelve cranial nerves and explain the functions associated with each
•
Describe the sensory and motor components of spinal nerves and the plexuses that they pass through
The PNS is not as contained as the CNS because it is defined as everything that is not the CNS. Some peripheral
structures are incorporated into the other organs of the body. In describing the anatomy of the PNS, it is necessary
to describe the common structures, the nerves and the ganglia, as they are found in various parts of the body. Many
of the neural structures that are incorporated into other organs are features of the digestive system; these
structures are known as the enteric nervous system and are a special subset of the PNS.
Ganglia
A ganglion is a group of neuron cell bodies in the periphery. Ganglia can be categorized, for the most part, as either
sensory ganglia or autonomic ganglia, referring to their primary functions. The most common type of sensory
ganglion is a dorsal (posterior) root ganglion. These ganglia are the cell bodies of neurons with axons that are
sensory endings in the periphery, such as in the skin, and that extend into the CNS through the dorsal nerve root.
The ganglion is an enlargement of the nerve root. Under microscopic inspection, it can be seen to include the cell
bodies of the neurons, as well as bundles of fibers that are the posterior nerve root (Figure 13.19). The cells of the
dorsal root ganglion are unipolar cells, classifying them by shape. Also, the small round nuclei of satellite cells can
be seen surrounding—as if they were orbiting—the neuron cell bodies.
Severe or limited memory loss can be the result of a temporal lobe stroke.
Related to strokes are transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), which can also be called “mini-strokes.” These are
events in which a physical blockage may be temporary, cutting off the blood supply and oxygen to a region, but
not to the extent that it causes cell death in that region. While the neurons in that area are recovering from the
event, neurological function may be lost. Function can return if the area is able to recover from the event.
Recovery from a stroke (or TIA) is strongly dependent on the speed of treatment. Often, the person who is
present and notices something is wrong must then make a decision. The mnemonic FAST helps people
remember what to look for when someone is dealing with sudden losses of neurological function. If someone
complains of feeling “funny,” check these things quickly: Look at the person’s face. Do they have problems
moving Face muscles and making regular facial expressions? Ask the person to raise their Arms above the head.
Can the person lift one arm but not the other? Has the person’s Speech changed? Are they slurring words or
having trouble saying things? If any of these things have happened, then it is Time to call for help.
Sometimes, treatment with blood-thinning drugs can alleviate the problem, and recovery is possible. If the
tissue is damaged, the amazing thing about the nervous system is that it is adaptable. With physical,
occupational, and speech therapy, victims of strokes can recover, or more accurately relearn, functions.
518
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.19
Dorsal Root Ganglion
The cell bodies of sensory neurons, which are unipolar neurons by shape, are seen in this
photomicrograph. Also, the fibrous region is composed of the axons of these neurons that are passing through the ganglion to be part of the
dorsal nerve root (tissue source: canine). LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
FIGURE 13.20
Spinal Cord and Root Ganglion
The slide includes both a cross-section of the lumbar spinal cord and a section of the
dorsal root ganglion (see also Figure 13.19) (tissue source: canine). LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/spinalroot) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom in on the dorsal root ganglion, you can see smaller satellite glial cells surrounding the large cell
bodies of the sensory neurons. From what structure do satellite cells derive during embryologic development?
Another type of sensory ganglion is a cranial nerve ganglion. This is analogous to the dorsal root ganglion, except
that it is associated with a cranial nerve instead of a spinal nerve. The roots of cranial nerves are within the
cranium, whereas the ganglia are outside the skull. For example, the trigeminal ganglion is superficial to the
temporal bone whereas its associated nerve is attached to the mid-pons region of the brain stem. The neurons of
13.4 • The Peripheral Nervous System
519
cranial nerve ganglia are also unipolar in shape with associated satellite cells.
The other major category of ganglia are those of the autonomic nervous system, which is divided into the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic chain ganglia constitute a row of ganglia
along the vertebral column that receive central input from the lateral horn of the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal
cord. Superior to the chain ganglia are three paravertebral ganglia in the cervical region. Three other autonomic
ganglia that are related to the sympathetic chain are the prevertebral ganglia, which are located outside of the
chain but have similar functions. They are referred to as prevertebral because they are anterior to the vertebral
column. The neurons of these autonomic ganglia are multipolar in shape, with dendrites radiating out around the
cell body where synapses from the spinal cord neurons are made. The neurons of the chain, paravertebral, and
prevertebral ganglia then project to organs in the head and neck, thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities to regulate
the sympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms.
Another group of autonomic ganglia are the terminal ganglia that receive input from cranial nerves or sacral spinal
nerves and are responsible for regulating the parasympathetic aspect of homeostatic mechanisms. These two sets
of ganglia, sympathetic and parasympathetic, often project to the same organs—one input from the chain ganglia
and one input from a terminal ganglion—to regulate the overall function of an organ. For example, the heart receives
two inputs such as these; one increases heart rate, and the other decreases it. The terminal ganglia that receive
input from cranial nerves are found in the head and neck, as well as the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities,
whereas the terminal ganglia that receive sacral input are in the lower abdominal and pelvic cavities.
Terminal ganglia below the head and neck are often incorporated into the wall of the target organ as a plexus. A
plexus, in a general sense, is a network of fibers or vessels. This can apply to nervous tissue (as in this instance) or
structures containing blood vessels (such as a choroid plexus). For example, the enteric plexus is the extensive
network of axons and neurons in the wall of the small and large intestines. The enteric plexus is actually part of the
enteric nervous system, along with the gastric plexuses and the esophageal plexus. Though the enteric nervous
system receives input originating from central neurons of the autonomic nervous system, it does not require CNS
input to function. In fact, it operates independently to regulate the digestive system.
Nerves
Bundles of axons in the PNS are referred to as nerves. These structures in the periphery are different than the
central counterpart, called a tract. Nerves are composed of more than just nervous tissue. They have connective
tissues invested in their structure, as well as blood vessels supplying the tissues with nourishment. The outer
surface of a nerve is a surrounding layer of fibrous connective tissue called the epineurium. Within the nerve, axons
are further bundled into fascicles, which are each surrounded by their own layer of fibrous connective tissue called
perineurium. Finally, individual axons are surrounded by loose connective tissue called the endoneurium (Figure
13.21). These three layers are similar to the connective tissue sheaths for muscles. Nerves are associated with the
region of the CNS to which they are connected, either as cranial nerves connected to the brain or spinal nerves
connected to the spinal cord.
520
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.21
Nerve Structure
The structure of a nerve is organized by the layers of connective tissue on the outside, around each
fascicle, and surrounding the individual nerve fibers (tissue source: simian). LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
FIGURE 13.22
Close-Up of Nerve Trunk
Zoom in on this slide of a nerve trunk to examine the endoneurium, perineurium, and
13.4 • The Peripheral Nervous System
521
epineurium in greater detail (tissue source: simian). LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/nervetrunk) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. With what structures in a skeletal muscle are the endoneurium, perineurium, and epineurium comparable?
Cranial Nerves
The nerves attached to the brain are the cranial nerves, which are primarily responsible for the sensory and motor
functions of the head and neck (one of these nerves targets organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities as part of
the parasympathetic nervous system). There are twelve cranial nerves, which are designated CNI through CNXII for
“Cranial Nerve,” using Roman numerals for 1 through 12. They can be classified as sensory nerves, motor nerves, or
a combination of both, meaning that the axons in these nerves originate out of sensory ganglia external to the
cranium or motor nuclei within the brain stem. Sensory axons enter the brain to synapse in a nucleus. Motor axons
connect to skeletal muscles of the head or neck. Three of the nerves are solely composed of sensory fibers; five are
strictly motor; and the remaining four are mixed nerves.
Learning the cranial nerves is a tradition in anatomy courses, and students have always used mnemonic devices to
remember the nerve names. A traditional mnemonic is the rhyming couplet, “On Old Olympus’ Towering Tops/A Finn
And German Viewed Some Hops,” in which the initial letter of each word corresponds to the initial letter in the name
of each nerve. The names of the nerves have changed over the years to reflect current usage and more accurate
naming. An exercise to help learn this sort of information is to generate a mnemonic using words that have personal
significance. The names of the cranial nerves are listed in Table 13.3 along with a brief description of their function,
their source (sensory ganglion or motor nucleus), and their target (sensory nucleus or skeletal muscle). They are
listed here with a brief explanation of each nerve (Figure 13.23).
The olfactory nerve and optic nerve are responsible for the sense of smell and vision, respectively. The oculomotor
nerve is responsible for eye movements by controlling four of the extraocular muscles. It is also responsible for
lifting the upper eyelid when the eyes point up, and for pupillary constriction. The trochlear nerve and the
abducens nerve are both responsible for eye movement, but do so by controlling different extraocular muscles. The
trigeminal nerve is responsible for cutaneous sensations of the face and controlling the muscles of mastication.
The facial nerve is responsible for the muscles involved in facial expressions, as well as part of the sense of taste
and the production of saliva. The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible for the senses of hearing and balance. The
glossopharyngeal nerve is responsible for controlling muscles in the oral cavity and upper throat, as well as part of
the sense of taste and the production of saliva. The vagus nerve is responsible for contributing to homeostatic
control of the organs of the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities. The spinal accessory nerve is responsible for
controlling the muscles of the neck, along with cervical spinal nerves. The hypoglossal nerve is responsible for
controlling the muscles of the lower throat and tongue.
522
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 13.23
The Cranial Nerves
The anatomical arrangement of the roots of the cranial nerves observed from an inferior view of the
brain.
Three of the cranial nerves also contain autonomic fibers, and a fourth is almost purely a component of the
autonomic system. The oculomotor, facial, and glossopharyngeal nerves contain fibers that contact autonomic
ganglia. The oculomotor fibers initiate pupillary constriction, whereas the facial and glossopharyngeal fibers both
initiate salivation. The vagus nerve primarily targets autonomic ganglia in the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/NYTmeningitis) to read about a man who wakes with a headache and a loss of
vision. His regular doctor sent him to an ophthalmologist to address the vision loss. The ophthalmologist recognizes
a greater problem and immediately sends him to the emergency room. Once there, the patient undergoes a large
battery of tests, but a definite cause cannot be found. A specialist recognizes the problem as meningitis, but the
question is what caused it originally. How can that be cured? The loss of vision comes from swelling around the optic
nerve, which probably presented as a bulge on the inside of the eye. Why is swelling related to meningitis going to
push on the optic nerve?
Another important aspect of the cranial nerves that lends itself to a mnemonic is the functional role each nerve
plays. The nerves fall into one of three basic groups. They are sensory, motor, or both (see Table 13.3). The
sentence, “Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Brains Beauty Matter More,” corresponds to the basic
function of each nerve. The first, second, and eighth nerves are purely sensory: the olfactory (CNI), optic (CNII), and
vestibulocochlear (CNVIII) nerves. The three eye-movement nerves are all motor: the oculomotor (CNIII), trochlear
(CNIV), and abducens (CNVI). The spinal accessory (CNXI) and hypoglossal (CNXII) nerves are also strictly motor.
The remainder of the nerves contain both sensory and motor fibers. They are the trigeminal (CNV), facial (CNVII),
glossopharyngeal (CNIX), and vagus (CNX) nerves. The nerves that convey both are often related to each other. The
trigeminal and facial nerves both concern the face; one concerns the sensations and the other concerns the muscle
movements. The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves are both responsible for conveying gustatory, or taste,
sensations as well as controlling salivary glands. The vagus nerve is involved in visceral responses to taste, namely
the gag reflex. This is not an exhaustive list of what these combination nerves do, but there is a thread of relation
between them.
13.4 • The Peripheral Nervous System
523
Cranial Nerves
Mnemonic
#
Name
Function
(S/M/B)
Central connection
(nuclei)
Peripheral connection
(ganglion or muscle)
On
I
Olfactory
Smell (S)
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory epithelium
Old
II
Optic
Vision (S)
Hypothalamus/
thalamus/midbrain
Retina (retinal ganglion cells)
Olympus’
III
Oculomotor
Eye
movements
(M)
Oculomotor
nucleus
Extraocular muscles (other
4), levator palpebrae
superioris, ciliary ganglion
(autonomic)
Towering
IV
Trochlear
Eye
movements
(M)
Trochlear nucleus
Superior oblique muscle
Tops
V
Trigeminal
Sensory/
motor –
face (B)
Trigeminal nuclei in
the midbrain, pons,
and medulla
Trigeminal
A
VI
Abducens
Eye
movements
(M)
Abducens nucleus
Lateral rectus muscle
Finn
VII
Facial
Motor –
face, Taste
(B)
Facial nucleus,
solitary nucleus,
superior salivatory
nucleus
Facial muscles, Geniculate
ganglion, Pterygopalatine
ganglion (autonomic)
And
VIII
Auditory
(Vestibulocochlear)
Hearing/
balance (S)
Cochlear nucleus,
Vestibular nucleus/
cerebellum
Spiral ganglion (hearing),
Vestibular ganglion (balance)
German
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Motor –
throat Taste
(B)
Solitary nucleus,
inferior salivatory
nucleus, nucleus
ambiguus
Pharyngeal muscles,
Geniculate ganglion, Otic
ganglion (autonomic)
Viewed
X
Vagus
Motor/
sensory –
viscera
(autonomic)
(B)
Medulla
Terminal ganglia serving
thoracic and upper abdominal
organs (heart and small
intestines)
TABLE 13.3
524
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
Mnemonic
#
Name
Function
(S/M/B)
Central connection
(nuclei)
Peripheral connection
(ganglion or muscle)
Some
XI
Spinal Accessory
Motor –
head and
neck (M)
Spinal accessory
nucleus
Neck muscles
Hops
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor –
lower throat
(M)
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Muscles of the larynx and
lower pharynx
TABLE 13.3
Spinal Nerves
The nerves connected to the spinal cord are the spinal nerves. The arrangement of these nerves is much more
regular than that of the cranial nerves. All of the spinal nerves are combined sensory and motor axons that separate
into two nerve roots. The sensory axons enter the spinal cord as the dorsal nerve root. The motor fibers, both
somatic and autonomic, emerge as the ventral nerve root. The dorsal root ganglion for each nerve is an enlargement
of the spinal nerve.
There are 31 spinal nerves, named for the level of the spinal cord at which each one emerges. There are eight pairs
of cervical nerves designated C1 to C8, twelve thoracic nerves designated T1 to T12, five pairs of lumbar nerves
designated L1 to L5, five pairs of sacral nerves designated S1 to S5, and one pair of coccygeal nerves. The nerves
are numbered from the superior to inferior positions, and each emerges from the vertebral column through the
intervertebral foramen at its level. The first nerve, C1, emerges between the first cervical vertebra and the occipital
bone. The second nerve, C2, emerges between the first and second cervical vertebrae. The same occurs for C3 to
C7, but C8 emerges between the seventh cervical vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra. For the thoracic and
lumbar nerves, each one emerges between the vertebra that has the same designation and the next vertebra in the
column. The sacral nerves emerge from the sacral foramina along the length of that unique vertebra.
Spinal nerves extend outward from the vertebral column to innervate the periphery. The nerves in the periphery are
not straight continuations of the spinal nerves, but rather the reorganization of the axons in those nerves to follow
different courses. Axons from different spinal nerves will come together into a systemic nerve. This occurs at four
places along the length of the vertebral column, each identified as a nerve plexus, whereas the other spinal nerves
directly correspond to nerves at their respective levels. In this instance, the word plexus is used to describe
networks of nerve fibers with no associated cell bodies.
Of the four nerve plexuses, two are found at the cervical level, one at the lumbar level, and one at the sacral level
(Figure 13.24). The cervical plexus is composed of axons from spinal nerves C1 through C5 and branches into
nerves in the posterior neck and head, as well as the phrenic nerve, which connects to the diaphragm at the base of
the thoracic cavity. The other plexus from the cervical level is the brachial plexus. Spinal nerves C4 through T1
reorganize through this plexus to give rise to the nerves of the arms, as the name brachial suggests. A large nerve
from this plexus is the radial nerve from which the axillary nerve branches to go to the armpit region. The radial
nerve continues through the arm and is paralleled by the ulnar nerve and the median nerve. The lumbar plexus
arises from all the lumbar spinal nerves and gives rise to nerves enervating the pelvic region and the anterior leg.
The femoral nerve is one of the major nerves from this plexus, which gives rise to the saphenous nerve as a branch
that extends through the anterior lower leg. The sacral plexus comes from the lower lumbar nerves L4 and L5 and
the sacral nerves S1 to S4. The most significant systemic nerve to come from this plexus is the sciatic nerve, which
is a combination of the tibial nerve and the fibular nerve. The sciatic nerve extends across the hip joint and is most
commonly associated with the condition sciatica, which is the result of compression or irritation of the nerve or any
of the spinal nerves giving rise to it.
These plexuses are described as arising from spinal nerves and giving rise to certain systemic nerves, but they
contain fibers that serve sensory functions or fibers that serve motor functions. This means that some fibers extend
from cutaneous or other peripheral sensory surfaces and send action potentials into the CNS. Those are axons of
13.4 • The Peripheral Nervous System
525
sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia that enter the spinal cord through the dorsal nerve root. Other fibers are
the axons of motor neurons of the anterior horn of the spinal cord, which emerge in the ventral nerve root and send
action potentials to cause skeletal muscles to contract in their target regions. For example, the radial nerve contains
fibers of cutaneous sensation in the arm, as well as motor fibers that move muscles in the arm.
Spinal nerves of the thoracic region, T2 through T11, are not part of the plexuses but rather emerge and give rise to
the intercostal nerves found between the ribs, which articulate with the vertebrae surrounding the spinal nerve.
FIGURE 13.24
Nerve Plexuses of the Body
There are four main nerve plexuses in the human body. The cervical plexus supplies nerves
to the posterior head and neck, as well as to the diaphragm. The brachial plexus supplies nerves to the arm. The lumbar plexus supplies
nerves to the anterior leg. The sacral plexus supplies nerves to the posterior leg.
526
13 • Anatomy of the Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
Aging and the...
Nervous System
Anosmia is the loss of the sense of smell. It is often the result of the olfactory nerve being severed, usually
because of blunt force trauma to the head. The sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium have a limited
lifespan of approximately one to four months, and new ones are made on a regular basis. The new neurons
extend their axons into the CNS by growing along the existing fibers of the olfactory nerve. The ability of these
neurons to be replaced is lost with age. Age-related anosmia is not the result of impact trauma to the head, but
rather a slow loss of the sensory neurons with no new neurons born to replace them.
Smell is an important sense, especially for the enjoyment of food. There are only five tastes sensed by the
tongue, and two of them are generally thought of as unpleasant tastes (sour and bitter). The rich sensory
experience of food is the result of odor molecules associated with the food, both as food is moved into the
mouth, and therefore passes under the nose, and when it is chewed and molecules are released to move up the
pharynx into the posterior nasal cavity. Anosmia results in a loss of the enjoyment of food.
As the replacement of olfactory neurons declines with age, anosmia can set in. Without the sense of smell, many
sufferers complain of food tasting bland. Often, the only way to enjoy food is to add seasoning that can be
sensed on the tongue, which usually means adding table salt. The problem with this solution, however, is that
this increases sodium intake, which can lead to cardiovascular problems through water retention and the
associated increase in blood pressure.
13.4 • The Peripheral Nervous System
527
Key Terms
abducens nerve
sixth cranial nerve; responsible for
contraction of one of the extraocular muscles
alar plate
developmental region of the spinal cord
that gives rise to the posterior horn of the gray
matter
amygdala
nucleus deep in the temporal lobe of the
cerebrum that is related to memory and emotional
behavior
anterior column
white matter between the anterior
horns of the spinal cord composed of many different
groups of axons of both ascending and descending
tracts
anterior horn
gray matter of the spinal cord
containing multipolar motor neurons, sometimes
referred to as the ventral horn
anterior median fissure
deep midline feature of the
anterior spinal cord, marking the separation
between the right and left sides of the cord
anterior spinal artery
blood vessel from the merged
branches of the vertebral arteries that runs along
the anterior surface of the spinal cord
arachnoid granulation
outpocket of the arachnoid
membrane into the dural sinuses that allows for
reabsorption of CSF into the blood
arachnoid mater
middle layer of the meninges
named for the spider-web–like trabeculae that
extend between it and the pia mater
arachnoid trabeculae
filaments between the
arachnoid and pia mater within the subarachnoid
space
ascending tract
central nervous system fibers
carrying sensory information from the spinal cord or
periphery to the brain
axillary nerve
systemic nerve of the arm that arises
from the brachial plexus
basal forebrain
nuclei of the cerebrum related to
modulation of sensory stimuli and attention through
broad projections to the cerebral cortex, loss of
which is related to Alzheimer’s disease
basal nuclei
nuclei of the cerebrum (with a few
components in the upper brain stem and
diencephalon) that are responsible for assessing
cortical movement commands and comparing them
with the general state of the individual through
broad modulatory activity of dopamine neurons;
largely related to motor functions, as evidenced
through the symptoms of Parkinson’s and
Huntington’s diseases
basal plate
developmental region of the spinal cord
that gives rise to the lateral and anterior horns of
gray matter
basilar artery
blood vessel from the merged
vertebral arteries that runs along the dorsal surface
of the brain stem
brachial plexus
nerve plexus associated with the
lower cervical spinal nerves and first thoracic spinal
nerve
brain stem
region of the adult brain that includes the
midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata and
develops from the mesencephalon, metencephalon,
and myelencephalon of the embryonic brain
Broca’s area
region of the frontal lobe associated
with the motor commands necessary for speech
production and located only in the cerebral
hemisphere responsible for language production,
which is the left side in approximately 95 percent of
the population
Brodmann’s areas
mapping of regions of the cerebral
cortex based on microscopic anatomy that relates
specific areas to functional differences, as
described by Brodmann in the early 1900s
carotid canal
opening in the temporal bone through
which the internal carotid artery enters the cranium
cauda equina
bundle of spinal nerve roots that
descend from the lower spinal cord below the first
lumbar vertebra and lie within the vertebral cavity;
has the appearance of a horse's tail
caudate
nucleus deep in the cerebrum that is part of
the basal nuclei; along with the putamen, it is part of
the striatum
central canal
hollow space within the spinal cord that
is the remnant of the center of the neural tube
central sulcus
surface landmark of the cerebral
cortex that marks the boundary between the frontal
and parietal lobes
cephalic flexure
curve in midbrain of the embryo that
positions the forebrain ventrally
cerebellum
region of the adult brain connected
primarily to the pons that developed from the
metencephalon (along with the pons) and is largely
responsible for comparing information from the
cerebrum with sensory feedback from the periphery
through the spinal cord
cerebral aqueduct
connection of the ventricular
system between the third and fourth ventricles
located in the midbrain
cerebral cortex
outer gray matter covering the
forebrain, marked by wrinkles and folds known as
gyri and sulci
cerebral hemisphere
one half of the bilaterally
symmetrical cerebrum
cerebrum
region of the adult brain that develops
from the telencephalon and is responsible for higher
neurological functions such as memory, emotion,
528
13 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
and consciousness
cervical plexus
nerve plexus associated with the
upper cervical spinal nerves
choroid plexus
specialized structures containing
ependymal cells lining blood capillaries that filter
blood to produce CSF in the four ventricles of the
brain
circle of Willis
unique anatomical arrangement of
blood vessels around the base of the brain that
maintains perfusion of blood into the brain even if
one component of the structure is blocked or
narrowed
common carotid artery
blood vessel that branches
off the aorta (or the brachiocephalic artery on the
right) and supplies blood to the head and neck
corpus callosum
large white matter structure that
connects the right and left cerebral hemispheres
cranial nerve
one of twelve nerves connected to the
brain that are responsible for sensory or motor
functions of the head and neck
cranial nerve ganglion
sensory ganglion of cranial
nerves
descending tract
central nervous system fibers
carrying motor commands from the brain to the
spinal cord or periphery
diencephalon
region of the adult brain that retains its
name from embryonic development and includes
the thalamus and hypothalamus
direct pathway
connections within the basal nuclei
from the striatum to the globus pallidus internal
segment and substantia nigra pars reticulata that
disinhibit the thalamus to increase cortical control
of movement
disinhibition
disynaptic connection in which the first
synapse inhibits the second cell, which then stops
inhibiting the final target
dorsal (posterior) nerve root
axons entering the
posterior horn of the spinal cord
dorsal (posterior) root ganglion
sensory ganglion
attached to the posterior nerve root of a spinal
nerve
dura mater
tough, fibrous, outer layer of the
meninges that is attached to the inner surface of the
cranium and vertebral column and surrounds the
entire CNS
dural sinus
any of the venous structures surrounding
the brain, enclosed within the dura mater, which
drain blood from the CNS to the common venous
return of the jugular veins
endoneurium
innermost layer of connective tissue
that surrounds individual axons within a nerve
enteric nervous system
peripheral structures,
namely ganglia and nerves, that are incorporated
into the digestive system organs
enteric plexus
neuronal plexus in the wall of the
intestines, which is part of the enteric nervous
system
epineurium
outermost layer of connective tissue that
surrounds an entire nerve
epithalamus
region of the diecephalon containing the
pineal gland
esophageal plexus
neuronal plexus in the wall of the
esophagus that is part of the enteric nervous system
extraocular muscles
six skeletal muscles that
control eye movement within the orbit
facial nerve
seventh cranial nerve; responsible for
contraction of the facial muscles and for part of the
sense of taste, as well as causing saliva production
fascicle
small bundles of nerve or muscle fibers
enclosed by connective tissue
femoral nerve
systemic nerve of the anterior leg that
arises from the lumbar plexus
fibular nerve
systemic nerve of the posterior leg that
begins as part of the sciatic nerve
foramen magnum
large opening in the occipital bone
of the skull through which the spinal cord emerges
and the vertebral arteries enter the cranium
forebrain
anterior region of the adult brain that
develops from the prosencephalon and includes the
cerebrum and diencephalon
fourth ventricle
the portion of the ventricular system
that is in the region of the brain stem and opens into
the subarachnoid space through the median and
lateral apertures
frontal eye field
region of the frontal lobe associated
with motor commands to orient the eyes toward an
object of visual attention
frontal lobe
region of the cerebral cortex directly
beneath the frontal bone of the cranium
gastric plexuses
neuronal networks in the wall of the
stomach that are part of the enteric nervous system
globus pallidus
nuclei deep in the cerebrum that are
part of the basal nuclei and can be divided into the
internal and external segments
glossopharyngeal nerve
ninth cranial nerve;
responsible for contraction of muscles in the tongue
and throat and for part of the sense of taste, as well
as causing saliva production
gyrus
ridge formed by convolutions on the surface of
the cerebrum or cerebellum
hindbrain
posterior region of the adult brain that
develops from the rhombencephalon and includes
the pons, medulla oblongata, and cerebellum
hippocampus
gray matter deep in the temporal lobe
that is very important for long-term memory
formation
13 • Key Terms
529
hypoglossal nerve
twelfth cranial nerve; responsible
for contraction of muscles of the tongue
hypothalamus
major region of the diencephalon that
is responsible for coordinating autonomic and
endocrine control of homeostasis
indirect pathway
connections within the basal nuclei
from the striatum through the globus pallidus
external segment and subthalamic nucleus to the
globus pallidus internal segment/substantia nigra
pars compacta that result in inhibition of the
thalamus to decrease cortical control of movement
inferior colliculus
half of the midbrain tectum that is
part of the brain stem auditory pathway
inferior olive
nucleus in the medulla that is involved
in processing information related to motor control
intercostal nerve
systemic nerve in the thoracic
cavity that is found between two ribs
internal carotid artery
branch from the common
carotid artery that enters the cranium and supplies
blood to the brain
interventricular foramina
openings between the
lateral ventricles and third ventricle allowing for the
passage of CSF
jugular veins
blood vessels that return “used” blood
from the head and neck
kinesthesia
general sensory perception of movement
of the body
lateral apertures
pair of openings from the fourth
ventricle to the subarachnoid space on either side
and between the medulla and cerebellum
lateral column
white matter of the spinal cord
between the posterior horn on one side and the
axons from the anterior horn on the same side;
composed of many different groups of axons, of
both ascending and descending tracts, carrying
motor commands to and from the brain
lateral horn
region of the spinal cord gray matter in
the thoracic, upper lumbar, and sacral regions that
is the central component of the sympathetic division
of the autonomic nervous system
lateral sulcus
surface landmark of the cerebral
cortex that marks the boundary between the
temporal lobe and the frontal and parietal lobes
lateral ventricles
portions of the ventricular system
that are in the region of the cerebrum
limbic cortex
collection of structures of the cerebral
cortex that are involved in emotion, memory, and
behavior and are part of the larger limbic system
limbic system
structures at the edge (limit) of the
boundary between the forebrain and hindbrain that
are most associated with emotional behavior and
memory formation
longitudinal fissure
large separation along the
midline between the two cerebral hemispheres
lumbar plexus
nerve plexus associated with the
lumbar spinal nerves
lumbar puncture
procedure used to withdraw CSF
from the lower lumbar region of the vertebral
column that avoids the risk of damaging CNS tissue
because the spinal cord ends at the upper lumbar
vertebrae
median aperture
singular opening from the fourth
ventricle into the subarachnoid space at the midline
between the medulla and cerebellum
median nerve
systemic nerve of the arm, located
between the ulnar and radial nerves
meninges
protective outer coverings of the CNS
composed of connective tissue
mesencephalon
primary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that does not significantly change through the
rest of embryonic development and becomes the
midbrain
metencephalon
secondary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that develops into the pons and the
cerebellum
midbrain
middle region of the adult brain that
develops from the mesencephalon
myelencephalon
secondary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that develops into the medulla
nerve plexus
network of nerves without neuronal cell
bodies included
neural crest
tissue that detaches from the edges of
the neural groove and migrates through the embryo
to develop into peripheral structures of both
nervous and non-nervous tissues
neural fold
elevated edge of the neural groove
neural groove
region of the neural plate that folds
into the dorsal surface of the embryo and closes off
to become the neural tube
neural plate
thickened layer of neuroepithelium that
runs longitudinally along the dorsal surface of an
embryo and gives rise to nervous system tissue
neural tube
precursor to structures of the central
nervous system, formed by the invagination and
separation of neuroepithelium
neuraxis
central axis to the nervous system, from the
posterior to anterior ends of the neural tube; the
inferior tip of the spinal cord to the anterior surface
of the cerebrum
occipital lobe
region of the cerebral cortex directly
beneath the occipital bone of the cranium
occipital sinuses
dural sinuses along the edge of the
occipital lobes of the cerebrum
oculomotor nerve
third cranial nerve; responsible for
contraction of four of the extraocular muscles, the
muscle in the upper eyelid, and pupillary
530
13 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
constriction
olfaction
special sense responsible for smell, which
has a unique, direct connection to the cerebrum
olfactory nerve
first cranial nerve; responsible for the
sense of smell
optic nerve
second cranial nerve; responsible for
visual sensation
orthostatic reflex
sympathetic function that
maintains blood pressure when standing to offset
the increased effect of gravity
paravertebral ganglia
autonomic ganglia superior to
the sympathetic chain ganglia
parietal lobe
region of the cerebral cortex directly
beneath the parietal bone of the cranium
parieto-occipital sulcus
groove in the cerebral cortex
representing the border between the parietal and
occipital cortices
perineurium
layer of connective tissue surrounding
fascicles within a nerve
phrenic nerve
systemic nerve from the cervical
plexus that innervates the diaphragm
pia mater
thin, innermost membrane of the meninges
that directly covers the surface of the CNS
plexus
network of nerves or nervous tissue
postcentral gyrus
primary motor cortex located in
the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex
posterior columns
white matter of the spinal cord
that lies between the posterior horns of the gray
matter, sometimes referred to as the dorsal column;
composed of axons of ascending tracts that carry
sensory information up to the brain
posterior horn
gray matter region of the spinal cord
in which sensory input arrives, sometimes referred
to as the dorsal horn
posterior median sulcus
midline feature of the
posterior spinal cord, marking the separation
between right and left sides of the cord
posterolateral sulcus
feature of the posterior spinal
cord marking the entry of posterior nerve roots and
the separation between the posterior and lateral
columns of the white matter
precentral gyrus
ridge just posterior to the central
sulcus, in the parietal lobe, where somatosensory
processing initially takes place in the cerebrum
prefrontal lobe
specific region of the frontal lobe
anterior to the more specific motor function areas,
which can be related to the early planning of
movements and intentions to the point of being
personality-type functions
premotor area
region of the frontal lobe responsible
for planning movements that will be executed
through the primary motor cortex
prevertebral ganglia
autonomic ganglia that are
anterior to the vertebral column and functionally
related to the sympathetic chain ganglia
primary vesicle
initial enlargements of the anterior
neural tube during embryonic development that
develop into the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain
proprioception
general sensory perceptions
providing information about location and movement
of body parts; the “sense of the self”
prosencephalon
primary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that develops into the forebrain, which
includes the cerebrum and diencephalon
putamen
nucleus deep in the cerebrum that is part of
the basal nuclei; along with the caudate, it is part of
the striatum
radial nerve
systemic nerve of the arm, the distal
component of which is located near the radial bone
reticular formation
diffuse region of gray matter
throughout the brain stem that regulates sleep,
wakefulness, and states of consciousness
rhombencephalon
primary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that develops into the hindbrain, which
includes the pons, cerebellum, and medulla
sacral plexus
nerve plexus associated with the lower
lumbar and sacral spinal nerves
saphenous nerve
systemic nerve of the lower
anterior leg that is a branch from the femoral nerve
sciatic nerve
systemic nerve from the sacral plexus
that is a combination of the tibial and fibular nerves
and extends across the hip joint and gluteal region
into the upper posterior leg
sciatica
painful condition resulting from inflammation
or compression of the sciatic nerve or any of the
spinal nerves that contribute to it
secondary vesicle
five vesicles that develop from
primary vesicles, continuing the process of
differentiation of the embryonic brain
sigmoid sinuses
dural sinuses that drain directly into
the jugular veins
somatosensation
general senses related to the body,
usually thought of as the senses of touch, which
would include pain, temperature, and
proprioception
spinal accessory nerve
eleventh cranial nerve;
responsible for contraction of neck muscles
spinal nerve
one of 31 nerves connected to the
spinal cord
straight sinus
dural sinus that drains blood from the
deep center of the brain to collect with the other
sinuses
striatum
the caudate and putamen collectively, as
part of the basal nuclei, which receive input from
the cerebral cortex
subarachnoid space
space between the arachnoid
13 • Key Terms
531
mater and pia mater that contains CSF and the
fibrous connections of the arachnoid trabeculae
subcortical nucleus
all the nuclei beneath the
cerebral cortex, including the basal nuclei and the
basal forebrain
substantia nigra pars compacta
nuclei within the
basal nuclei that release dopamine to modulate the
function of the striatum; part of the motor pathway
substantia nigra pars reticulata
nuclei within the
basal nuclei that serve as an output center of the
nuclei; part of the motor pathway
subthalamus
nucleus within the basal nuclei that is
part of the indirect pathway
sulcus
groove formed by convolutions in the surface
of the cerebral cortex
superior colliculus
half of the midbrain tectum that is
responsible for aligning visual, auditory, and
somatosensory spatial perceptions
superior sagittal sinus
dural sinus that runs along
the top of the longitudinal fissure and drains blood
from the majority of the outer cerebrum
sympathetic chain ganglia
autonomic ganglia in a
chain along the anterolateral aspect of the vertebral
column that are responsible for contributing to
homeostatic mechanisms of the autonomic nervous
system
systemic nerve
nerve in the periphery distal to a
nerve plexus or spinal nerve
tectum
region of the midbrain, thought of as the roof
of the cerebral aqueduct, which is subdivided into
the inferior and superior colliculi
tegmentum
region of the midbrain, thought of as the
floor of the cerebral aqueduct, which continues into
the pons and medulla as the floor of the fourth
ventricle
telencephalon
secondary vesicle of the embryonic
brain that develops into the cerebrum
temporal lobe
region of the cerebral cortex directly
beneath the temporal bone of the cranium
terminal ganglion
autonomic ganglia that are near or
within the walls of organs that are responsible for
contributing to homeostatic mechanisms of the
autonomic nervous system
thalamus
major region of the diencephalon that is
responsible for relaying information between the
cerebrum and the hindbrain, spinal cord, and
periphery
third ventricle
portion of the ventricular system that
is in the region of the diencephalon
tibial nerve
systemic nerve of the posterior leg that
begins as part of the sciatic nerve
transverse sinuses
dural sinuses that drain along
either side of the occipital–cerebellar space
trigeminal ganglion
sensory ganglion that
contributes sensory fibers to the trigeminal nerve
trigeminal nerve
fifth cranial nerve; responsible for
cutaneous sensation of the face and contraction of
the muscles of mastication
trochlear nerve
fourth cranial nerve; responsible for
contraction of one of the extraocular muscles
ulnar nerve
systemic nerve of the arm located close
to the ulna, a bone of the forearm
vagus nerve
tenth cranial nerve; responsible for the
autonomic control of organs in the thoracic and
upper abdominal cavities
ventral (anterior) nerve root
axons emerging from
the anterior or lateral horns of the spinal cord
ventricles
remnants of the hollow center of the
neural tube that are spaces for cerebrospinal fluid
to circulate through the brain
vertebral arteries
arteries that ascend along either
side of the vertebral column through the transverse
foramina of the cervical vertebrae and enter the
cranium through the foramen magnum
vestibulocochlear nerve
eighth cranial nerve;
responsible for the sensations of hearing and
balance
Chapter Review
13.1 The Embryologic Perspective
The development of the nervous system starts early in
embryonic development. The outer layer of the
embryo, the ectoderm, gives rise to the skin and the
nervous system. A specialized region of this layer, the
neuroectoderm, becomes a groove that folds in and
becomes the neural tube beneath the dorsal surface of
the embryo. The anterior end of the neural tube
develops into the brain, and the posterior region
becomes the spinal cord. Tissues at the edges of the
neural groove, when it closes off, are called the neural
crest and migrate through the embryo to give rise to
PNS structures as well as some non-nervous tissues.
The brain develops from this early tube structure and
gives rise to specific regions of the adult brain. As the
neural tube grows and differentiates, it enlarges into
three vesicles that correspond to the forebrain,
midbrain, and hindbrain regions of the adult brain.
Later in development, two of these three vesicles
differentiate further, resulting in five vesicles. Those
five vesicles can be aligned with the four major regions
of the adult brain. The cerebrum is formed directly
from the telencephalon. The diencephalon is the only
region that keeps its embryonic name. The
532
13 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon
become the brain stem. The cerebellum also develops
from the metencephalon and is a separate region of the
adult brain.
The spinal cord develops out of the rest of the neural
tube and retains the tube structure, with the nervous
tissue thickening and the hollow center becoming a
very small central canal through the cord. The rest of
the hollow center of the neural tube corresponds to
open spaces within the brain called the ventricles,
where cerebrospinal fluid is found.
13.2 The Central Nervous System
The adult brain is separated into four major regions:
the cerebrum, the diencephalon, the brain stem, and
the cerebellum. The cerebrum is the largest portion
and contains the cerebral cortex and subcortical nuclei.
It is divided into two halves by the longitudinal fissure.
The cortex is separated into the frontal, parietal,
temporal, and occipital lobes. The frontal lobe is
responsible for motor functions, from planning
movements through executing commands to be sent to
the spinal cord and periphery. The most anterior
portion of the frontal lobe is the prefrontal cortex,
which is associated with aspects of personality through
its influence on motor responses in decision-making.
The other lobes are responsible for sensory functions.
The parietal lobe is where somatosensation is
processed. The occipital lobe is where visual
processing begins, although the other parts of the brain
can contribute to visual function. The temporal lobe
contains the cortical area for auditory processing, but
also has regions crucial for memory formation.
Nuclei beneath the cerebral cortex, known as the
subcortical nuclei, are responsible for augmenting
cortical functions. The basal nuclei receive input from
cortical areas and compare it with the general state of
the individual through the activity of a dopamine-
releasing nucleus. The output influences the activity of
part of the thalamus that can then increase or decrease
cortical activity that often results in changes to motor
commands. The basal forebrain is responsible for
modulating cortical activity in attention and memory.
The limbic system includes deep cerebral nuclei that
are responsible for emotion and memory.
The diencephalon includes the thalamus and the
hypothalamus, along with some other structures. The
thalamus is a relay between the cerebrum and the rest
of the nervous system. The hypothalamus coordinates
homeostatic functions through the autonomic and
endocrine systems.
The brain stem is composed of the midbrain, pons, and
medulla. It controls the head and neck region of the
body through the cranial nerves. There are control
centers in the brain stem that regulate the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
The cerebellum is connected to the brain stem,
primarily at the pons, where it receives a copy of the
descending input from the cerebrum to the spinal cord.
It can compare this with sensory feedback input
through the medulla and send output through the
midbrain that can correct motor commands for
coordination.
13.3 Circulation and the Central Nervous
System
The CNS has a privileged blood supply established by
the blood-brain barrier. Establishing this barrier are
anatomical structures that help to protect and isolate
the CNS. The arterial blood to the brain comes from the
internal carotid and vertebral arteries, which both
contribute to the unique circle of Willis that provides
constant perfusion of the brain even if one of the blood
vessels is blocked or narrowed. That blood is
eventually filtered to make a separate medium, the
CSF, that circulates within the spaces of the brain and
then into the surrounding space defined by the
meninges, the protective covering of the brain and
spinal cord.
The blood that nourishes the brain and spinal cord is
behind the glial-cell–enforced blood-brain barrier,
which limits the exchange of material from blood
vessels with the interstitial fluid of the nervous tissue.
Thus, metabolic wastes are collected in cerebrospinal
fluid that circulates through the CNS. This fluid is
produced by filtering blood at the choroid plexuses in
the four ventricles of the brain. It then circulates
through the ventricles and into the subarachnoid
space, between the pia mater and the arachnoid mater.
From the arachnoid granulations, CSF is reabsorbed
into the blood, removing the waste from the privileged
central nervous tissue.
The blood, now with the reabsorbed CSF, drains out of
the cranium through the dural sinuses. The dura mater
is the tough outer covering of the CNS, which is
anchored to the inner surface of the cranial and
vertebral cavities. It surrounds the venous space
known as the dural sinuses, which connect to the
jugular veins, where blood drains from the head and
neck.
13.4 The Peripheral Nervous System
The PNS is composed of the groups of neurons
13 • Chapter Review
533
(ganglia) and bundles of axons (nerves) that are
outside of the brain and spinal cord. Ganglia are of two
types, sensory or autonomic. Sensory ganglia contain
unipolar sensory neurons and are found on the dorsal
root of all spinal nerves as well as associated with
many of the cranial nerves. Autonomic ganglia are in
the sympathetic chain, the associated paravertebral or
prevertebral ganglia, or in terminal ganglia near or
within the organs controlled by the autonomic nervous
system.
Nerves are classified as cranial nerves or spinal nerves
on the basis of their connection to the brain or spinal
cord, respectively. The twelve cranial nerves can be
strictly sensory in function, strictly motor in function, or
a combination of the two functions. Sensory fibers are
axons of sensory ganglia that carry sensory information
into the brain and target sensory nuclei. Motor fibers
are axons of motor neurons in motor nuclei of the brain
stem and target skeletal muscles of the head and neck.
Spinal nerves are all mixed nerves with both sensory
and motor fibers. Spinal nerves emerge from the spinal
cord and reorganize through plexuses, which then give
rise to systemic nerves. Thoracic spinal nerves are not
part of any plexus, but give rise to the intercostal
nerves directly.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
braindevel) to examine the development of the
brain, starting with the neural tube. As the anterior
end of the neural tube develops, it enlarges into the
primary vesicles that establish the forebrain,
midbrain, and hindbrain. Those structures continue
to develop throughout the rest of embryonic
development and into adolescence. They are the
basis of the structure of the fully developed adult
brain. How would you describe the difference in the
relative sizes of the three regions of the brain when
comparing the early (25th embryonic day) brain and
the adult brain?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
whitematter) to learn about the white matter in the
cerebrum that develops during childhood and
adolescence. This is a composite of MRI images
taken of the brains of people from 5 years of age
through 20 years of age, demonstrating how the
cerebrum changes. As the color changes to blue,
the ratio of gray matter to white matter changes.
The caption for the video describes it as “less gray
matter,” which is another way of saying “more white
matter.” If the brain does not finish developing until
approximately 20 years of age, can teenagers be
held responsible for behaving badly?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
basalnuclei1) to learn about the basal nuclei (also
known as the basal ganglia), which have two
pathways that process information within the
cerebrum. As shown in this video, the direct
pathway is the shorter pathway through the system
that results in increased activity in the cerebral
cortex and increased motor activity. The direct
pathway is described as resulting in “disinhibition”
of the thalamus. What does disinhibition mean?
What are the two neurons doing individually to
cause this?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
basalnuclei2) to learn about the basal nuclei (also
known as the basal ganglia), which have two
pathways that process information within the
cerebrum. As shown in this video, the indirect
pathway is the longer pathway through the system
that results in decreased activity in the cerebral
cortex, and therefore less motor activity. The
indirect pathway has an extra couple of connections
in it, including disinhibition of the subthalamic
nucleus. What is the end result on the thalamus,
and therefore on movement initiated by the
cerebral cortex?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/graymatter)
to learn about the gray matter of the spinal cord
that receives input from fibers of the dorsal
(posterior) root and sends information out through
the fibers of the ventral (anterior) root. As
discussed in this video, these connections
represent the interactions of the CNS with
peripheral structures for both sensory and motor
functions. The cervical and lumbar spinal cords
have enlargements as a result of larger populations
of neurons. What are these enlargements
responsible for?
534
13 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
6. Compared with the nearest evolutionary relative,
the chimpanzee, the human has a brain that is
huge. At a point in the past, a common ancestor
gave rise to the two species of humans and
chimpanzees. That evolutionary history is long and
is still an area of intense study. But something
happened to increase the size of the human brain
relative to the chimpanzee. Read this article
(http://openstax.org/l/hugebrain) in which the
author explores the current understanding of why
this happened.
According to one hypothesis about the expansion of
brain size, what tissue might have been sacrificed
so energy was available to grow our larger brain?
Based on what you know about that tissue and
nervous tissue, why would there be a trade-off
between them in terms of energy use?
7. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
bloodflow1) to see how blood flows to the brain and
passes through the circle of Willis before being
distributed through the cerebrum. The circle of
Willis is a specialized arrangement of arteries that
ensure constant perfusion of the cerebrum even in
the event of a blockage of one of the arteries in the
circle. The animation shows the normal direction of
flow through the circle of Willis to the middle
cerebral artery. Where would the blood come from
if there were a blockage just posterior to the middle
cerebral artery on the left?
8. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
lumbarpuncture) that describes the procedure
known as the lumbar puncture, a medical
procedure used to sample the CSF. Because of the
anatomy of the CNS, it is a relative safe location to
insert a needle. Why is the lumbar puncture
performed in the lower lumbar area of the vertebral
column?
9. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
CSFflow) that shows the flow of CSF through the
brain and spinal cord, and how it originates from
the ventricles and then spreads into the space
within the meninges, where the fluids then move
into the venous sinuses to return to the
cardiovascular circulation. What are the structures
that produce CSF and where are they found? How
are the structures indicated in this animation?
10. Figure 13.20 If you zoom in on the DRG, you can
see smaller satellite glial cells surrounding the
large cell bodies of the sensory neurons. From
what structure do satellite cells derive during
embryologic development?
11. Figure 13.22 To what structures in a skeletal
muscle are the endoneurium, perineurium, and
epineurium comparable?
12. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/
NYTmeningitis) to read about a man who wakes
with a headache and a loss of vision. His regular
doctor sent him to an ophthalmologist to address
the vision loss. The ophthalmologist recognizes a
greater problem and immediately sends him to the
emergency room. Once there, the patient
undergoes a large battery of tests, but a definite
cause cannot be found. A specialist recognizes the
problem as meningitis, but the question is what
caused it originally. How can that be cured? The
loss of vision comes from swelling around the
optic nerve, which probably presented as a bulge
on the inside of the eye. Why is swelling related to
meningitis going to push on the optic nerve?
Review Questions
13. Aside from the nervous system, which other organ
system develops out of the ectoderm?
a.
digestive
b.
respiratory
c.
integumentary
d.
urinary
14. Which primary vesicle of the embryonic nervous
system does not differentiate into more vesicles at
the secondary stage?
a.
prosencephalon
b.
mesencephalon
c.
diencephalon
d.
rhombencephalon
15. Which adult structure(s) arises from the
diencephalon?
a.
thalamus, hypothalamus, retina
b.
midbrain, pons, medulla
c.
pons and cerebellum
d.
cerebrum
16. Which non-nervous tissue develops from the
neuroectoderm?
a.
respiratory mucosa
b.
vertebral bone
c.
digestive lining
d.
craniofacial bone
13 • Review Questions
535
17. Which structure is associated with the
embryologic development of the peripheral
nervous system?
a.
neural crest
b.
neuraxis
c.
rhombencephalon
d.
neural tube
18. Which lobe of the cerebral cortex is responsible
for generating motor commands?
a.
temporal
b.
parietal
c.
occipital
d.
frontal
19. What region of the diencephalon coordinates
homeostasis?
a.
thalamus
b.
epithalamus
c.
hypothalamus
d.
subthalamus
20. What level of the brain stem is the major input to
the cerebellum?
a.
midbrain
b.
pons
c.
medulla
d.
spinal cord
21. What region of the spinal cord contains motor
neurons that direct the movement of skeletal
muscles?
a.
anterior horn
b.
posterior horn
c.
lateral horn
d.
alar plate
22. Brodmann’s areas map different regions of the
________ to particular functions.
a.
cerebellum
b.
cerebral cortex
c.
basal forebrain
d.
corpus callosum
23. What blood vessel enters the cranium to supply
the brain with fresh, oxygenated blood?
a.
common carotid artery
b.
jugular vein
c.
internal carotid artery
d.
aorta
24. Which layer of the meninges surrounds and
supports the sinuses that form the route through
which blood drains from the CNS?
a.
dura mater
b.
arachnoid mater
c.
subarachnoid
d.
pia mater
25. What type of glial cell is responsible for filtering
blood to produce CSF at the choroid plexus?
a.
ependymal cell
b.
astrocyte
c.
oligodendrocyte
d.
Schwann cell
26. Which portion of the ventricular system is found
within the diencephalon?
a.
lateral ventricles
b.
third ventricle
c.
cerebral aqueduct
d.
fourth ventricle
27. What condition causes a stroke?
a.
inflammation of meninges
b.
lumbar puncture
c.
infection of cerebral spinal fluid
d.
disruption of blood to the brain
28. What type of ganglion contains neurons that
control homeostatic mechanisms of the body?
a.
sensory ganglion
b.
dorsal root ganglion
c.
autonomic ganglion
d.
cranial nerve ganglion
29. Which ganglion is responsible for cutaneous
sensations of the face?
a.
otic ganglion
b.
vestibular ganglion
c.
geniculate ganglion
d.
trigeminal ganglion
30. What is the name for a bundle of axons within a
nerve?
a.
fascicle
b.
tract
c.
nerve root
d.
epineurium
31. Which cranial nerve does not control functions in
the head and neck?
a.
olfactory
b.
trochlear
c.
glossopharyngeal
d.
vagus
536
13 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
32. Which of these structures is not under direct
control of the peripheral nervous system?
a.
trigeminal ganglion
b.
gastric plexus
c.
sympathetic chain ganglia
d.
cervical plexus
Critical Thinking Questions
33. Studying the embryonic development of the
nervous system makes it easier to understand the
complexity of the adult nervous system. Give one
example of how development in the embryonic
nervous system explains a more complex
structure in the adult nervous system.
34. What happens in development that suggests that
there is a special relationship between the
skeletal structure of the head and the nervous
system?
35. Damage to specific regions of the cerebral cortex,
such as through a stroke, can result in specific
losses of function. What functions would likely be
lost by a stroke in the temporal lobe?
36. Why do the anatomical inputs to the cerebellum
suggest that it can compare motor commands and
sensory feedback?
37. Why can the circle of Willis maintain perfusion of
the brain even if there is a blockage in one part of
the structure?
38. Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges that
can have severe effects on neurological function.
Why is infection of this structure potentially so
dangerous?
39. Why are ganglia and nerves not surrounded by
protective structures like the meninges of the
CNS?
40. Testing for neurological function involves a series
of tests of functions associated with the cranial
nerves. What functions, and therefore which
nerves, are being tested by asking a patient to
follow the tip of a pen with their eyes?
13 • Critical Thinking Questions
537
538
13 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 14
The Somatic Nervous System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the components of the somatic nervous system
•
Name the modalities and submodalities of the sensory systems
•
Distinguish between general and special senses
•
Describe regions of the central nervous system that contribute to somatic functions
•
Explain the stimulus-response motor pathway
The somatic nervous system is traditionally considered a division within the peripheral nervous
system. However, this misses an important point: somatic refers to a functional division, whereas peripheral refers
to an anatomic division. The somatic nervous system is responsible for our conscious perception of the environment
and for our voluntary responses to that perception by means of skeletal muscles. Peripheral sensory neurons
receive input from environmental stimuli, but the neurons that produce motor responses originate in the central
nervous system. The distinction between the structures (i.e., anatomy) of the peripheral and central nervous
systems and functions (i.e., physiology) of the somatic and autonomic systems can most easily be demonstrated
through a simple reflex action. When you touch a hot stove, you pull your hand away. Sensory receptors in the skin
sense extreme temperature and the early signs of tissue damage. This triggers an action potential, which travels
along the sensory fiber from the skin, through the dorsal spinal root to the spinal cord, and directly activates a
ventral horn motor neuron. That neuron sends a signal along its axon to excite the biceps brachii, causing
contraction of the muscle and flexion of the forearm at the elbow to withdraw the hand from the hot stove. The
withdrawal reflex has more components, such as inhibiting the opposing muscle and balancing posture while the
arm is forcefully withdrawn, which will be further explored at the end of this chapter.
The basic withdrawal reflex explained above includes sensory input (the painful stimulus), central processing (the
synapse in the spinal cord), and motor output (activation of a ventral motor neuron that causes contraction of the
biceps brachii). Expanding the explanation of the withdrawal reflex can include inhibition of the opposing muscle, or
cross extension, either of which increase the complexity of the example by involving more central neurons. A
Figure 14.1
Too Hot to Touch When high temperature is sensed in the skin, a reflexive withdrawal is initiated by the muscles of the arm.
Sensory neurons are activated by a stimulus, which is sent to the central nervous system, and a motor response is sent out to the skeletal
muscles that control this movement.
collateral branch of the sensory axon would inhibit another ventral horn motor neuron so that the triceps brachii do
not contract and slow the withdrawal down. The cross extensor reflex provides a counterbalancing movement on
the other side of the body, which requires another collateral of the sensory axon to activate contraction of the
extensor muscles in the contralateral limb.
A more complex example of somatic function is conscious muscle movement. For example, reading of this text
starts with visual sensory input to the retina, which then projects to the thalamus, and on to the cerebral cortex. A
sequence of regions of the cerebral cortex process the visual information, starting in the primary visual cortex of the
occipital lobe, and resulting in the conscious perception of these letters. Subsequent cognitive processing results in
understanding of the content. As you continue reading, regions of the cerebral cortex in the frontal lobe plan how to
move the eyes to follow the lines of text. The output from the cortex causes activity in motor neurons in the brain
stem that cause movement of the extraocular muscles through the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves. This
example also includes sensory input (the retinal projection to the thalamus), central processing (the thalamus and
subsequent cortical activity), and motor output (activation of neurons in the brain stem that lead to coordinated
contraction of extraocular muscles).
14.1 Sensory Perception
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe different types of sensory receptors
•
Describe the structures responsible for the special senses of taste, smell, hearing, balance, and vision
•
Distinguish how different tastes are transduced
•
Describe the means of mechanoreception for hearing and balance
•
List the supporting structures around the eye and describe the structure of the eyeball
•
Describe the processes of phototransduction
A major role of sensory receptors is to help us learn about the environment around us, or about the state of our
internal environment. Stimuli from varying sources, and of different types, are received and changed into the
electrochemical signals of the nervous system. This occurs when a stimulus changes the cell membrane potential of
a sensory neuron. The stimulus causes the sensory cell to produce an action potential that is relayed into the central
nervous system (CNS), where it is integrated with other sensory information—or sometimes higher cognitive
functions—to become a conscious perception of that stimulus. The central integration may then lead to a motor
response.
Describing sensory function with the term sensation or perception is a deliberate distinction. Sensation is the
activation of sensory receptor cells at the level of the stimulus. Perception is the central processing of sensory
stimuli into a meaningful pattern. Perception is dependent on sensation, but not all sensations are perceived.
Receptors are the cells or structures that detect sensations. A receptor cell is changed directly by a stimulus. A
transmembrane protein receptor is a protein in the cell membrane that mediates a physiological change in a neuron,
most often through the opening of ion channels or changes in the cell signaling processes. Transmembrane
receptors are activated by chemicals called ligands. For example, a molecule in food can serve as a ligand for taste
receptors. Other transmembrane proteins, which are not accurately called receptors, are sensitive to mechanical or
thermal changes. Physical changes in these proteins increase ion flow across the membrane, and can generate an
action potential or a graded potential in the sensory neurons.
Sensory Receptors
Stimuli in the environment activate specialized receptor cells in the peripheral nervous system. Different types of
stimuli are sensed by different types of receptor cells. Receptor cells can be classified into types on the basis of
three different criteria: cell type, position, and function. Receptors can be classified structurally on the basis of cell
type and their position in relation to stimuli they sense. They can also be classified functionally on the basis of the
transduction of stimuli, or how the mechanical stimulus, light, or chemical changed the cell membrane potential.
Structural Receptor Types
The cells that interpret information about the environment can be either (1) a neuron that has a free nerve ending,
540
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
with dendrites embedded in tissue that would receive a sensation; (2) a neuron that has an encapsulated ending in
which the sensory nerve endings are encapsulated in connective tissue that enhances their sensitivity; or (3) a
specialized receptor cell, which has distinct structural components that interpret a specific type of stimulus (Figure
14.2). The pain and temperature receptors in the dermis of the skin are examples of neurons that have free nerve
endings. Also located in the dermis of the skin are lamellated corpuscles, neurons with encapsulated nerve endings
that respond to pressure and touch. The cells in the retina that respond to light stimuli are an example of a
specialized receptor, a photoreceptor.
FIGURE 14.2
Receptor Classification by Cell Type
Receptor cell types can be classified on the basis of their structure. Sensory
neurons can have either (a) free nerve endings or (b) encapsulated endings. Photoreceptors in the eyes, such as rod cells, are examples of
(c) specialized receptor cells. These cells release neurotransmitters onto a bipolar cell, which then synapses with the optic nerve neurons.
Another way that receptors can be classified is based on their location relative to the stimuli. An exteroceptor is a
receptor that is located near a stimulus in the external environment, such as the somatosensory receptors that are
located in the skin. An interoceptor is one that interprets stimuli from internal organs and tissues, such as the
receptors that sense the increase in blood pressure in the aorta or carotid sinus. Finally, a proprioceptor is a
receptor located near a moving part of the body, such as a muscle, that interprets the positions of the tissues as
they move.
Functional Receptor Types
A third classification of receptors is by how the receptor transduces stimuli into membrane potential changes.
Stimuli are of three general types. Some stimuli are ions and macromolecules that affect transmembrane receptor
proteins when these chemicals diffuse across the cell membrane. Some stimuli are physical variations in the
environment that affect receptor cell membrane potentials. Other stimuli include the electromagnetic radiation from
visible light. For humans, the only electromagnetic energy that is perceived by our eyes is visible light. Some other
organisms have receptors that humans lack, such as the heat sensors of snakes, the ultraviolet light sensors of
bees, or magnetic receptors in migratory birds.
Receptor cells can be further categorized on the basis of the type of stimuli they transduce. Chemical stimuli can be
interpreted by a chemoreceptor that interprets chemical stimuli, such as an object’s taste or smell. Osmoreceptors
respond to solute concentrations of body fluids. Additionally, pain is primarily a chemical sense that interprets the
presence of chemicals from tissue damage, or similar intense stimuli, through a nociceptor. Physical stimuli, such
as pressure and vibration, as well as the sensation of sound and body position (balance), are interpreted through a
mechanoreceptor. Another physical stimulus that has its own type of receptor is temperature, which is sensed
through a thermoreceptor that is either sensitive to temperatures above (heat) or below (cold) normal body
temperature.
Sensory Modalities
Ask anyone what the senses are, and they are likely to list the five major senses—taste, smell, touch, hearing, and
sight. However, these are not all of the senses. The most obvious omission from this list is balance. Also, what is
referred to simply as touch can be further subdivided into pressure, vibration, stretch, and hair-follicle position, on
14.1 • Sensory Perception
541
the basis of the type of mechanoreceptors that perceive these touch sensations. Other overlooked senses include
temperature perception by thermoreceptors and pain perception by nociceptors.
Within the realm of physiology, senses can be classified as either general or specific. A general sense is one that is
distributed throughout the body and has receptor cells within the structures of other organs. Mechanoreceptors in
the skin, muscles, or the walls of blood vessels are examples of this type. General senses often contribute to the
sense of touch, as described above, or to proprioception (body movement) and kinesthesia (body movement), or to
a visceral sense, which is most important to autonomic functions. A special sense is one that has a specific organ
devoted to it, namely the eye, inner ear, tongue, or nose.
Each of the senses is referred to as a sensory modality. Modality refers to the way that information is encoded,
which is similar to the idea of transduction. The main sensory modalities can be described on the basis of how each
is transduced. The chemical senses are taste and smell. The general sense that is usually referred to as touch
includes chemical sensation in the form of nociception, or pain. Pressure, vibration, muscle stretch, and the
movement of hair by an external stimulus, are all sensed by mechanoreceptors. Hearing and balance are also
sensed by mechanoreceptors. Finally, vision involves the activation of photoreceptors.
Listing all the different sensory modalities, which can number as many as 17, involves separating the five major
senses into more specific categories, or submodalities, of the larger sense. An individual sensory modality
represents the sensation of a specific type of stimulus. For example, the general sense of touch, which is known as
somatosensation, can be separated into light pressure, deep pressure, vibration, itch, pain, temperature, or hair
movement.
Gustation (Taste)
Only a few recognized submodalities exist within the sense of taste, or gustation. Until recently, only four tastes
were recognized: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. Research at the turn of the 20th century led to recognition of the fifth
taste, umami, during the mid-1980s. Umami is a Japanese word that means “delicious taste,” and is often
translated to mean savory. Very recent research has suggested that there may also be a sixth taste for fats, or lipids.
Gustation is the special sense associated with the tongue. The surface of the tongue, along with the rest of the oral
cavity, is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium. Raised bumps called papillae (singular = papilla) contain the
structures for gustatory transduction. There are four types of papillae, based on their appearance (Figure 14.3):
circumvallate, foliate, filiform, and fungiform. Within the structure of the papillae are taste buds that contain
specialized gustatory receptor cells for the transduction of taste stimuli. These receptor cells are sensitive to the
chemicals contained within foods that are ingested, and they release neurotransmitters based on the amount of the
chemical in the food. Neurotransmitters from the gustatory cells can activate sensory neurons in the facial,
glossopharyngeal, and vagus cranial nerves.
542
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.3
The Tongue
The tongue is covered with small bumps, called papillae, which contain taste buds that are sensitive to
chemicals in ingested food or drink. Different types of papillae are found in different regions of the tongue. The taste buds contain
specialized gustatory receptor cells that respond to chemical stimuli dissolved in the saliva. These receptor cells activate sensory neurons
that are part of the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
Salty taste is simply the perception of sodium ions (Na+) in the saliva. When you eat something salty, the salt
crystals dissociate into the component ions Na+ and Cl–, which dissolve into the saliva in your mouth. The Na+
concentration becomes high outside the gustatory cells, creating a strong concentration gradient that drives the
diffusion of the ion into the cells. The entry of Na+ into these cells results in the depolarization of the cell membrane
and the generation of a receptor potential.
Sour taste is the perception of H+ concentration. Just as with sodium ions in salty flavors, these hydrogen ions enter
the cell and trigger depolarization. Sour flavors are, essentially, the perception of acids in our food. Increasing
hydrogen ion concentrations in the saliva (lowering saliva pH) triggers progressively stronger graded potentials in
the gustatory cells. For example, orange juice—which contains citric acid—will taste sour because it has a pH value
of approximately 3. Of course, it is often sweetened so that the sour taste is masked.
The first two tastes (salty and sour) are triggered by the cations Na+ and H+. The other tastes result from food
molecules binding to a G protein–coupled receptor. A G protein signal transduction system ultimately leads to
depolarization of the gustatory cell. The sweet taste is the sensitivity of gustatory cells to the presence of glucose
dissolved in the saliva. Other monosaccharides such as fructose, or artificial sweeteners such as aspartame
(NutraSweet™), saccharine, or sucralose (Splenda™) also activate the sweet receptors. The affinity for each of these
molecules varies, and some will taste sweeter than glucose because they bind to the G protein–coupled receptor
differently.
Bitter taste is similar to sweet in that food molecules bind to G protein–coupled receptors. However, there are a
number of different ways in which this can happen because there are a large diversity of bitter-tasting molecules.
Some bitter molecules depolarize gustatory cells, whereas others hyperpolarize gustatory cells. Likewise, some
bitter molecules increase G protein activation within the gustatory cells, whereas other bitter molecules decrease G
14.1 • Sensory Perception
543
protein activation. The specific response depends on which molecule is binding to the receptor.
One major group of bitter-tasting molecules are alkaloids. Alkaloids are nitrogen containing molecules that are
commonly found in bitter-tasting plant products, such as coffee, hops (in beer), tannins (in wine), tea, and aspirin.
By containing toxic alkaloids, the plant is less susceptible to microbe infection and less attractive to herbivores.
Therefore, the function of bitter taste may primarily be related to stimulating the gag reflex to avoid ingesting
poisons. Because of this, many bitter foods that are normally ingested are often combined with a sweet component
to make them more palatable (cream and sugar in coffee, for example). The highest concentration of bitter receptors
appear to be in the posterior tongue, where a gag reflex could still spit out poisonous food.
The taste known as umami is often referred to as the savory taste. Like sweet and bitter, it is based on the activation
of G protein–coupled receptors by a specific molecule. The molecule that activates this receptor is the amino acid L-
glutamate. Therefore, the umami flavor is often perceived while eating protein-rich foods. Not surprisingly, dishes
that contain meat are often described as savory.
Once the gustatory cells are activated by the taste molecules, they release neurotransmitters onto the dendrites of
sensory neurons. These neurons are part of the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves, as well as a component
within the vagus nerve dedicated to the gag reflex. The facial nerve connects to taste buds in the anterior third of the
tongue. The glossopharyngeal nerve connects to taste buds in the posterior two thirds of the tongue. The vagus
nerve connects to taste buds in the extreme posterior of the tongue, verging on the pharynx, which are more
sensitive to noxious stimuli such as bitterness.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/DanielleReed) to learn about Dr. Danielle Reed of the Monell Chemical
Senses Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, who became interested in science at an early age because of her
sensory experiences. She recognized that her sense of taste was unique compared with other people she knew.
Now, she studies the genetic differences between people and their sensitivities to taste stimuli. In the video, there is
a brief image of a person sticking out their tongue, which has been covered with a colored dye. This is how Dr. Reed
is able to visualize and count papillae on the surface of the tongue. People fall into two groups known as “tasters”
and “non-tasters” based on the density of papillae on their tongue, which also indicates the number of taste buds.
Non-tasters can taste food, but they are not as sensitive to certain tastes, such as bitterness. Dr. Reed discovered
that she is a non-taster, which explains why she perceived bitterness differently than other people she knew. Are
you very sensitive to tastes? Can you see any similarities among the members of your family?
Olfaction (Smell)
Like taste, the sense of smell, or olfaction, is also responsive to chemical stimuli. The olfactory receptor neurons are
located in a small region within the superior nasal cavity (Figure 14.4). This region is referred to as the olfactory
epithelium and contains bipolar sensory neurons. Each olfactory sensory neuron has dendrites that extend from
the apical surface of the epithelium into the mucus lining the cavity. As airborne molecules are inhaled through the
nose, they pass over the olfactory epithelial region and dissolve into the mucus. These odorant molecules bind to
proteins that keep them dissolved in the mucus and help transport them to the olfactory dendrites. The
odorant–protein complex binds to a receptor protein within the cell membrane of an olfactory dendrite. These
receptors are G protein–coupled, and will produce a graded membrane potential in the olfactory neurons.
The axon of an olfactory neuron extends from the basal surface of the epithelium, through an olfactory foramen in
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, and into the brain. The group of axons called the olfactory tract connect to
the olfactory bulb on the ventral surface of the frontal lobe. From there, the axons split to travel to several brain
regions. Some travel to the cerebrum, specifically to the primary olfactory cortex that is located in the inferior and
medial areas of the temporal lobe. Others project to structures within the limbic system and hypothalamus, where
smells become associated with long-term memory and emotional responses. This is how certain smells trigger
emotional memories, such as the smell of food associated with one’s birthplace. Smell is the one sensory modality
that does not synapse in the thalamus before connecting to the cerebral cortex. This intimate connection between
the olfactory system and the cerebral cortex is one reason why smell can be a potent trigger of memories and
emotion.
544
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
The nasal epithelium, including the olfactory cells, can be harmed by airborne toxic chemicals. Therefore, the
olfactory neurons are regularly replaced within the nasal epithelium, after which the axons of the new neurons must
find their appropriate connections in the olfactory bulb. These new axons grow along the axons that are already in
place in the cranial nerve.
FIGURE 14.4
The Olfactory System
(a) The olfactory system begins in the peripheral structures of the nasal cavity. (b) The olfactory
receptor neurons are within the olfactory epithelium. (c) Axons of the olfactory receptor neurons project through the cribriform plate of the
ethmoid bone and synapse with the neurons of the olfactory bulb (tissue source: simian). LM × 812. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Olfactory System: Anosmia
Blunt force trauma to the face, such as that common in many car accidents, can lead to the loss of the olfactory
nerve, and subsequently, loss of the sense of smell. This condition is known as anosmia. When the frontal lobe
of the brain moves relative to the ethmoid bone, the olfactory tract axons may be sheared apart. Professional
fighters often experience anosmia because of repeated trauma to face and head. In addition, certain
pharmaceuticals, such as antibiotics, can cause anosmia by killing all the olfactory neurons at once. If no axons
are in place within the olfactory nerve, then the axons from newly formed olfactory neurons have no guide to
lead them to their connections within the olfactory bulb. There are temporary causes of anosmia, as well, such
as those caused by inflammatory responses related to respiratory infections or allergies.
Loss of the sense of smell can result in food tasting bland. A person with an impaired sense of smell may require
additional spice and seasoning levels for food to be tasted. Anosmia may also be related to some presentations
14.1 • Sensory Perception
545
Audition (Hearing)
Hearing, or audition, is the transduction of sound waves into a neural signal that is made possible by the structures
of the ear (Figure 14.5). The large, fleshy structure on the lateral aspect of the head is known as the auricle. Some
sources will also refer to this structure as the pinna, though that term is more appropriate for a structure that can be
moved, such as the external ear of a cat. The C-shaped curves of the auricle direct sound waves toward the auditory
canal. The canal enters the skull through the external auditory meatus of the temporal bone. At the end of the
auditory canal is the tympanic membrane, or ear drum, which vibrates after it is struck by sound waves. The auricle,
ear canal, and tympanic membrane are often referred to as the external ear. The middle ear consists of a space
spanned by three small bones called the ossicles. The three ossicles are the malleus, incus, and stapes, which are
Latin names that roughly translate to hammer, anvil, and stirrup. The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane
and articulates with the incus. The incus, in turn, articulates with the stapes. The stapes is then attached to the
inner ear, where the sound waves will be transduced into a neural signal. The middle ear is connected to the
pharynx through the Eustachian tube, which helps equilibrate air pressure across the tympanic membrane. The tube
is normally closed but will pop open when the muscles of the pharynx contract during swallowing or yawning.
FIGURE 14.5
Structures of the Ear
The external ear contains the auricle, ear canal, and tympanic membrane. The middle ear contains
the ossicles and is connected to the pharynx by the Eustachian tube. The inner ear contains the cochlea and vestibule, which are
responsible for audition and equilibrium, respectively.
The inner ear is often described as a bony labyrinth, as it is composed of a series of canals embedded within the
temporal bone. It has two separate regions, the cochlea and the vestibule, which are responsible for hearing and
balance, respectively. The neural signals from these two regions are relayed to the brain stem through separate fiber
bundles. However, these two distinct bundles travel together from the inner ear to the brain stem as the
vestibulocochlear nerve. Sound is transduced into neural signals within the cochlear region of the inner ear, which
contains the sensory neurons of the spiral ganglia. These ganglia are located within the spiral-shaped cochlea of
the inner ear. The cochlea is attached to the stapes through the oval window.
The oval window is located at the beginning of a fluid-filled tube within the cochlea called the scala vestibuli. The
scala vestibuli extends from the oval window, travelling above the cochlear duct, which is the central cavity of the
cochlea that contains the sound-transducing neurons. At the uppermost tip of the cochlea, the scala vestibuli curves
over the top of the cochlear duct. The fluid-filled tube, now called the scala tympani, returns to the base of the
cochlea, this time travelling under the cochlear duct. The scala tympani ends at the round window, which is
of mild depression, because the loss of enjoyment of food may lead to a general sense of despair.
The ability of olfactory neurons to replace themselves decreases with age, leading to age-related anosmia. This
explains why some elderly people salt their food more than younger people do. However, this increased sodium
intake can increase blood volume and blood pressure, increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases in the
elderly.
546
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
covered by a membrane that contains the fluid within the scala. As vibrations of the ossicles travel through the oval
window, the fluid of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani moves in a wave-like motion. The frequency of the fluid
waves match the frequencies of the sound waves (Figure 14.6). The membrane covering the round window will
bulge out or pucker in with the movement of the fluid within the scala tympani.
FIGURE 14.6
Transmission of Sound Waves to Cochlea
A sound wave causes the tympanic membrane to vibrate. This vibration is
amplified as it moves across the malleus, incus, and stapes. The amplified vibration is picked up by the oval window causing pressure
waves in the fluid of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani. The complexity of the pressure waves is determined by the changes in amplitude
and frequency of the sound waves entering the ear.
A cross-sectional view of the cochlea shows that the scala vestibuli and scala tympani run along both sides of the
cochlear duct (Figure 14.7). The cochlear duct contains several organs of Corti, which transduce the wave motion of
the two scala into neural signals. The organs of Corti lie on top of the basilar membrane, which is the side of the
cochlear duct located between the organs of Corti and the scala tympani. As the fluid waves move through the scala
vestibuli and scala tympani, the basilar membrane moves at a specific spot, depending on the frequency of the
waves. Higher frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is close to the base of the cochlea.
Lower frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is near the tip of the cochlea.
FIGURE 14.7
Cross Section of the Cochlea
The three major spaces within the cochlea are highlighted. The scala tympani and scala
14.1 • Sensory Perception
547
vestibuli lie on either side of the cochlear duct. The organ of Corti, containing the mechanoreceptor hair cells, is adjacent to the scala
tympani, where it sits atop the basilar membrane.
The organs of Corti contain hair cells, which are named for the hair-like stereocilia extending from the cell’s apical
surfaces (Figure 14.8). The stereocilia are an array of microvilli-like structures arranged from tallest to shortest.
Protein fibers tether adjacent hairs together within each array, such that the array will bend in response to
movements of the basilar membrane. The stereocilia extend up from the hair cells to the overlying tectorial
membrane, which is attached medially to the organ of Corti. When the pressure waves from the scala move the
basilar membrane, the tectorial membrane slides across the stereocilia. This bends the stereocilia either toward or
away from the tallest member of each array. When the stereocilia bend toward the tallest member of their array,
tension in the protein tethers opens ion channels in the hair cell membrane. This will depolarize the hair cell
membrane, triggering nerve impulses that travel down the afferent nerve fibers attached to the hair cells. When the
stereocilia bend toward the shortest member of their array, the tension on the tethers slackens and the ion channels
close. When no sound is present, and the stereocilia are standing straight, a small amount of tension still exists on
the tethers, keeping the membrane potential of the hair cell slightly depolarized.
FIGURE 14.8
Hair Cell
The hair cell is a mechanoreceptor with an array of stereocilia emerging from its apical surface. The stereocilia
are tethered together by proteins that open ion channels when the array is bent toward the tallest member of their array, and closed when
the array is bent toward the shortest member of their array.
FIGURE 14.9
Cochlea and Organ of Corti
LM × 412. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/cochleaMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. The basilar membrane is the thin membrane that extends from the central core of the cochlea to the edge.
548
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
What is anchored to this membrane so that they can be activated by movement of the fluids within the cochlea?
As stated above, a given region of the basilar membrane will only move if the incoming sound is at a specific
frequency. Because the tectorial membrane only moves where the basilar membrane moves, the hair cells in this
region will also only respond to sounds of this specific frequency. Therefore, as the frequency of a sound changes,
different hair cells are activated all along the basilar membrane. The cochlea encodes auditory stimuli for
frequencies between 20 and 20,000 Hz, which is the range of sound that human ears can detect. The unit of Hertz
measures the frequency of sound waves in terms of cycles produced per second. Frequencies as low as 20 Hz are
detected by hair cells at the apex, or tip, of the cochlea. Frequencies in the higher ranges of 20 KHz are encoded by
hair cells at the base of the cochlea, close to the round and oval windows (Figure 14.10). Most auditory stimuli
contain a mixture of sounds at a variety of frequencies and intensities (represented by the amplitude of the sound
wave). The hair cells along the length of the cochlear duct, which are each sensitive to a particular frequency, allow
the cochlea to separate auditory stimuli by frequency, just as a prism separates visible light into its component
colors.
FIGURE 14.10
Frequency Coding in the Cochlea
The standing sound wave generated in the cochlea by the movement of the oval
window deflects the basilar membrane on the basis of the frequency of sound. Therefore, hair cells at the base of the cochlea are activated
only by high frequencies, whereas those at the apex of the cochlea are activated only by low frequencies.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ear1) to learn more about how the structures of the ear convert sound waves
into a neural signal by moving the “hairs,” or stereocilia, of the cochlear duct. Specific locations along the length of
the duct encode specific frequencies, or pitches. The brain interprets the meaning of the sounds we hear as music,
speech, noise, etc. Which ear structures are responsible for the amplification and transfer of sound from the
external ear to the inner ear?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/ear2) to learn more about the inner ear and to see the cochlea unroll,
with the base at the back of the image and the apex at the front. Specific wavelengths of sound cause specific
regions of the basilar membrane to vibrate, much like the keys of a piano produce sound at different frequencies.
Based on the animation, where do frequencies—from high to low pitches—cause activity in the hair cells within the
cochlear duct?
14.1 • Sensory Perception
549
Equilibrium (Balance)
Along with audition, the inner ear is responsible for encoding information about equilibrium, the sense of balance. A
similar mechanoreceptor—a hair cell with stereocilia—senses head position, head movement, and whether our
bodies are in motion. These cells are located within the vestibule of the inner ear. Head position is sensed by the
utricle and saccule, whereas head movement is sensed by the semicircular canals. The neural signals generated in
the vestibular ganglion are transmitted through the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain stem and cerebellum.
The utricle and saccule are both largely composed of macula tissue (plural = maculae). The macula is composed of
hair cells surrounded by support cells. The stereocilia of the hair cells extend into a viscous gel called the otolithic
membrane (Figure 14.11). On top of the otolithic membrane is a layer of calcium carbonate crystals, called otoliths.
The otoliths essentially make the otolithic membrane top-heavy. The otolithic membrane moves separately from the
macula in response to head movements. Tilting the head causes the otolithic membrane to slide over the macula in
the direction of gravity. The moving otolithic membrane, in turn, bends the sterocilia, causing some hair cells to
depolarize as others hyperpolarize. The exact position of the head is interpreted by the brain based on the pattern of
hair-cell depolarization.
FIGURE 14.11
Linear Acceleration Coding by Maculae
The maculae are specialized for sensing linear acceleration, such as when
gravity acts on the tilting head, or if the head starts moving in a straight line. The difference in inertia between the hair cell stereocilia and
the otolithic membrane in which they are embedded leads to a shearing force that causes the stereocilia to bend in the direction of that
linear acceleration.
The semicircular canals are three ring-like extensions of the vestibule. One is oriented in the horizontal plane,
whereas the other two are oriented in the vertical plane. The anterior and posterior vertical canals are oriented at
approximately 45 degrees relative to the sagittal plane (Figure 14.12). The base of each semicircular canal, where it
meets with the vestibule, connects to an enlarged region known as the ampulla. The ampulla contains the hair cells
that respond to rotational movement, such as turning the head while saying “no.” The stereocilia of these hair cells
extend into the cupula, a membrane that attaches to the top of the ampulla. As the head rotates in a plane parallel
to the semicircular canal, the fluid lags, deflecting the cupula in the direction opposite to the head movement. The
semicircular canals contain several ampullae, with some oriented horizontally and others oriented vertically. By
comparing the relative movements of both the horizontal and vertical ampullae, the vestibular system can detect
the direction of most head movements within three-dimensional (3-D) space.
550
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.12
Rotational Coding by Semicircular Canals
Rotational movement of the head is encoded by the hair cells in the base of
the semicircular canals. As one of the canals moves in an arc with the head, the internal fluid moves in the opposite direction, causing the
cupula and stereocilia to bend. The movement of two canals within a plane results in information about the direction in which the head is
moving, and activation of all six canals can give a very precise indication of head movement in three dimensions.
Somatosensation (Touch)
Somatosensation is considered a general sense, as opposed to the special senses discussed in this section.
Somatosensation is the group of sensory modalities that are associated with touch, proprioception, and
interoception. These modalities include pressure, vibration, light touch, tickle, itch, temperature, pain,
proprioception, and kinesthesia. This means that its receptors are not associated with a specialized organ, but are
instead spread throughout the body in a variety of organs. Many of the somatosensory receptors are located in the
skin, but receptors are also found in muscles, tendons, joint capsules, ligaments, and in the walls of visceral organs.
Two types of somatosensory signals that are transduced by free nerve endings are pain and temperature. These two
modalities use thermoreceptors and nociceptors to transduce temperature and pain stimuli, respectively.
Temperature receptors are stimulated when local temperatures differ from body temperature. Some
thermoreceptors are sensitive to just cold and others to just heat. Nociception is the sensation of potentially
damaging stimuli. Mechanical, chemical, or thermal stimuli beyond a set threshold will elicit painful sensations.
Stressed or damaged tissues release chemicals that activate receptor proteins in the nociceptors. For example, the
sensation of heat associated with spicy foods involves capsaicin, the active molecule in hot peppers. Capsaicin
molecules bind to a transmembrane ion channel in nociceptors that is sensitive to temperatures above 37°C. The
dynamics of capsaicin binding with this transmembrane ion channel is unusual in that the molecule remains bound
for a long time. Because of this, it will decrease the ability of other stimuli to elicit pain sensations through the
activated nociceptor. For this reason, capsaicin can be used as a topical analgesic, such as in products such as Icy
Hot™.
If you drag your finger across a textured surface, the skin of your finger will vibrate. Such low frequency vibrations
are sensed by mechanoreceptors called Merkel cells, also known as type I cutaneous mechanoreceptors. Merkel
cells are located in the stratum basale of the epidermis. Deep pressure and vibration is transduced by lamellated
(Pacinian) corpuscles, which are receptors with encapsulated endings found deep in the dermis, or subcutaneous
tissue. Light touch is transduced by the encapsulated endings known as tactile (Meissner) corpuscles. Follicles are
also wrapped in a plexus of nerve endings known as the hair follicle plexus. These nerve endings detect the
movement of hair at the surface of the skin, such as when an insect may be walking along the skin. Stretching of the
skin is transduced by stretch receptors known as bulbous corpuscles. Bulbous corpuscles are also known as Ruffini
corpuscles, or type II cutaneous mechanoreceptors.
Other somatosensory receptors are found in the joints and muscles. Stretch receptors monitor the stretching of
tendons, muscles, and the components of joints. For example, have you ever stretched your muscles before or after
exercise and noticed that you can only stretch so far before your muscles spasm back to a less stretched state? This
spasm is a reflex that is initiated by stretch receptors to avoid muscle tearing. Such stretch receptors can also
prevent over-contraction of a muscle. In skeletal muscle tissue, these stretch receptors are called muscle spindles.
14.1 • Sensory Perception
551
Golgi tendon organs similarly transduce the stretch levels of tendons. Bulbous corpuscles are also present in joint
capsules, where they measure stretch in the components of the skeletal system within the joint. The types of nerve
endings, their locations, and the stimuli they transduce are presented in Table 14.1.
Mechanoreceptors of Somatosensation
Name
Historical
(eponymous)
name
Location(s)
Stimuli
Free nerve
endings
*
Dermis, cornea, tongue, joint
capsules, visceral organs
Pain, temperature, mechanical
deformation
Mechanoreceptors
Merkel’s discs
Epidermal–dermal junction,
mucosal membranes
Low frequency vibration (5–15
Hz)
Bulbous corpuscle
Ruffini’s
corpuscle
Dermis, joint capsules
Stretch
Tactile corpuscle
Meissner’s
corpuscle
Papillary dermis, especially in
the fingertips and lips
Light touch, vibrations below 50
Hz
Lamellated
corpuscle
Pacinian
corpuscle
Deep dermis, subcutaneous
tissue
Deep pressure, high-frequency
vibration (around 250 Hz)
Hair follicle plexus
*
Wrapped around hair follicles in
the dermis
Movement of hair
Muscle spindle
*
In line with skeletal muscle
fibers
Muscle contraction and stretch
Tendon stretch
organ
Golgi tendon
organ
In line with tendons
Stretch of tendons
TABLE 14.1 *No corresponding eponymous name.
Vision
Vision is the special sense of sight that is based on the transduction of light stimuli received through the eyes. The
eyes are located within either orbit in the skull. The bony orbits surround the eyeballs, protecting them and
anchoring the soft tissues of the eye (Figure 14.13). The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, help to protect
the eye from abrasions by blocking particles that may land on the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each lid is
a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye (the
sclera), connecting the eyelids to the eyeball. Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland, located just inside the
orbit, superior and lateral to the eyeball. Tears produced by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the medial
corner of the eye, where the tears flow over the conjunctiva, washing away foreign particles.
552
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.13
The Eye in the Orbit
The eye is located within the orbit and surrounded by soft tissues that protect and support its
function. The orbit is surrounded by cranial bones of the skull.
Movement of the eye within the orbit is accomplished by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate
from the bones of the orbit and insert into the surface of the eyeball (Figure 14.14). Four of the muscles are
arranged at the cardinal points around the eye and are named for those locations. They are the superior rectus,
medial rectus, inferior rectus, and lateral rectus. When each of these muscles contract, the eye moves toward the
contracting muscle. For example, when the superior rectus contracts, the eye rotates to look up. The superior
oblique originates at the posterior orbit, near the origin of the four rectus muscles. However, the tendon of the
oblique muscles threads through a pulley-like piece of cartilage known as the trochlea. The tendon inserts obliquely
into the superior surface of the eye. The angle of the tendon through the trochlea means that contraction of the
superior oblique rotates the eye laterally. The inferior oblique muscle originates from the floor of the orbit and
inserts into the inferolateral surface of the eye. When it contracts, it laterally rotates the eye, in opposition to the
superior oblique. Rotation of the eye by the two oblique muscles is necessary because the eye is not perfectly
aligned on the sagittal plane. When the eye looks up or down, the eye must also rotate slightly to compensate for the
superior rectus pulling at approximately a 20-degree angle, rather than straight up. The same is true for the inferior
rectus, which is compensated by contraction of the inferior oblique. A seventh muscle in the orbit is the levator
palpebrae superioris, which is responsible for elevating and retracting the upper eyelid, a movement that usually
occurs in concert with elevation of the eye by the superior rectus (see Figure 14.13).
The extraocular muscles are innervated by three cranial nerves. The lateral rectus, which causes abduction of the
eye, is innervated by the abducens nerve. The superior oblique is innervated by the trochlear nerve. All of the other
muscles are innervated by the oculomotor nerve, as is the levator palpebrae superioris. The motor nuclei of these
cranial nerves connect to the brain stem, which coordinates eye movements.
FIGURE 14.14
Extraocular Muscles
The extraocular muscles move the eye within the orbit.
14.1 • Sensory Perception
553
The eye itself is a hollow sphere composed of three layers of tissue. The outermost layer is the fibrous tunic, which
includes the white sclera and clear cornea. The sclera accounts for five sixths of the surface of the eye, most of
which is not visible, though humans are unique compared with many other species in having so much of the “white
of the eye” visible (Figure 14.15). The transparent cornea covers the anterior tip of the eye and allows light to enter
the eye. The middle layer of the eye is the vascular tunic, which is mostly composed of the choroid, ciliary body, and
iris. The choroid is a layer of highly vascularized connective tissue that provides a blood supply to the eyeball. The
choroid is posterior to the ciliary body, a muscular structure that is attached to the lens by suspensory ligaments,
or zonule fibers. These two structures bend the lens, allowing it to focus light on the back of the eye. Overlaying the
ciliary body, and visible in the anterior eye, is the iris—the colored part of the eye. The iris is a smooth muscle that
opens or closes the pupil, which is the hole at the center of the eye that allows light to enter. The iris constricts the
pupil in response to bright light and dilates the pupil in response to dim light. The innermost layer of the eye is the
neural tunic, or retina, which contains the nervous tissue responsible for photoreception.
The eye is also divided into two cavities: the anterior cavity and the posterior cavity. The anterior cavity is the space
between the cornea and lens, including the iris and ciliary body. It is filled with a watery fluid called the aqueous
humor. The posterior cavity is the space behind the lens that extends to the posterior side of the interior eyeball,
where the retina is located. The posterior cavity is filled with a more viscous fluid called the vitreous humor.
The retina is composed of several layers and contains specialized cells for the initial processing of visual stimuli. The
photoreceptors (rods and cones) change their membrane potential when stimulated by light energy. The change in
membrane potential alters the amount of neurotransmitter that the photoreceptor cells release onto bipolar cells in
the outer synaptic layer. It is the bipolar cell in the retina that connects a photoreceptor to a retinal ganglion cell
(RGC) in the inner synaptic layer. There, amacrine cells additionally contribute to retinal processing before an
action potential is produced by the RGC. The axons of RGCs, which lie at the innermost layer of the retina, collect at
the optic disc and leave the eye as the optic nerve (see Figure 14.15). Because these axons pass through the
retina, there are no photoreceptors at the very back of the eye, where the optic nerve begins. This creates a “blind
spot” in the retina, and a corresponding blind spot in our visual field.
FIGURE 14.15
Structure of the Eye
The sphere of the eye can be divided into anterior and posterior chambers. The wall of the eye is
composed of three layers: the fibrous tunic, vascular tunic, and neural tunic. Within the neural tunic is the retina, with three layers of cells
and two synaptic layers in between. The center of the retina has a small indentation known as the fovea.
Note that the photoreceptors in the retina (rods and cones) are located behind the axons, RGCs, bipolar cells, and
retinal blood vessels. A significant amount of light is absorbed by these structures before the light reaches the
photoreceptor cells. However, at the exact center of the retina is a small area known as the fovea. At the fovea, the
retina lacks the supporting cells and blood vessels, and only contains photoreceptors. Therefore, visual acuity, or
the sharpness of vision, is greatest at the fovea. This is because the fovea is where the least amount of incoming
light is absorbed by other retinal structures (see Figure 14.15). As one moves in either direction from this central
554
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
point of the retina, visual acuity drops significantly. In addition, each photoreceptor cell of the fovea is connected to
a single RGC. Therefore, this RGC does not have to integrate inputs from multiple photoreceptors, which reduces the
accuracy of visual transduction. Toward the edges of the retina, several photoreceptors converge on RGCs (through
the bipolar cells) up to a ratio of 50 to 1. The difference in visual acuity between the fovea and peripheral retina is
easily evidenced by looking directly at a word in the middle of this paragraph. The visual stimulus in the middle of
the field of view falls on the fovea and is in the sharpest focus. Without moving your eyes off that word, notice that
words at the beginning or end of the paragraph are not in focus. The images in your peripheral vision are focused by
the peripheral retina, and have vague, blurry edges and words that are not as clearly identified. As a result, a large
part of the neural function of the eyes is concerned with moving the eyes and head so that important visual stimuli
are centered on the fovea.
Light falling on the retina causes chemical changes to pigment molecules in the photoreceptors, ultimately leading
to a change in the activity of the RGCs. Photoreceptor cells have two parts, the inner segment and the outer
segment (Figure 14.16). The inner segment contains the nucleus and other common organelles of a cell, whereas
the outer segment is a specialized region in which photoreception takes place. There are two types of
photoreceptors—rods and cones—which differ in the shape of their outer segment. The rod-shaped outer segments
of the rod photoreceptor contain a stack of membrane-bound discs that contain the photosensitive pigment
rhodopsin. The cone-shaped outer segments of the cone photoreceptor contain their photosensitive pigments in
infoldings of the cell membrane. There are three cone photopigments, called opsins, which are each sensitive to a
particular wavelength of light. The wavelength of visible light determines its color. The pigments in human eyes are
specialized in perceiving three different primary colors: red, green, and blue.
14.1 • Sensory Perception
555
FIGURE 14.16
Photoreceptor
(a) All photoreceptors have inner segments containing the nucleus and other important organelles and
outer segments with membrane arrays containing the photosensitive opsin molecules. Rod outer segments are long columnar shapes with
stacks of membrane-bound discs that contain the rhodopsin pigment. Cone outer segments are short, tapered shapes with folds of
membrane in place of the discs in the rods. (b) Tissue of the retina shows a dense layer of nuclei of the rods and cones. LM × 800.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
At the molecular level, visual stimuli cause changes in the photopigment molecule that lead to changes in
membrane potential of the photoreceptor cell. A single unit of light is called a photon, which is described in physics
as a packet of energy with properties of both a particle and a wave. The energy of a photon is represented by its
wavelength, with each wavelength of visible light corresponding to a particular color. Visible light is electromagnetic
radiation with a wavelength between 380 and 720 nm. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation longer than 720
nm fall into the infrared range, whereas wavelengths shorter than 380 nm fall into the ultraviolet range. Light with a
wavelength of 380 nm is blue whereas light with a wavelength of 720 nm is dark red. All other colors fall between
red and blue at various points along the wavelength scale.
Opsin pigments are actually transmembrane proteins that contain a cofactor known as retinal. Retinal is a
556
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
hydrocarbon molecule related to vitamin A. When a photon hits retinal, the long hydrocarbon chain of the molecule
is biochemically altered. Specifically, photons cause some of the double-bonded carbons within the chain to switch
from a cis to a trans conformation. This process is called photoisomerization. Before interacting with a photon,
retinal’s flexible double-bonded carbons are in the cis conformation. This molecule is referred to as 11-cis-retinal. A
photon interacting with the molecule causes the flexible double-bonded carbons to change to the trans-
conformation, forming all-trans-retinal, which has a straight hydrocarbon chain (Figure 14.17).
The shape change of retinal in the photoreceptors initiates visual transduction in the retina. Activation of retinal and
the opsin proteins result in activation of a G protein. The G protein changes the membrane potential of the
photoreceptor cell, which then releases less neurotransmitter into the outer synaptic layer of the retina. Until the
retinal molecule is changed back to the 11-cis-retinal shape, the opsin cannot respond to light energy, which is
called bleaching. When a large group of photopigments is bleached, the retina will send information as if opposing
visual information is being perceived. After a bright flash of light, afterimages are usually seen in negative. The
photoisomerization is reversed by a series of enzymatic changes so that the retinal responds to more light energy.
FIGURE 14.17
Retinal Isomers
The retinal molecule has two isomers, (a) one before a photon interacts with it and (b) one that is
altered through photoisomerization.
The opsins are sensitive to limited wavelengths of light. Rhodopsin, the photopigment in rods, is most sensitive to
light at a wavelength of 498 nm. The three color opsins have peak sensitivities of 564 nm, 534 nm, and 420 nm
corresponding roughly to the primary colors of red, green, and blue (Figure 14.18). The absorbance of rhodopsin in
the rods is much more sensitive than in the cone opsins; specifically, rods are sensitive to vision in low light
conditions, and cones are sensitive to brighter conditions. In normal sunlight, rhodopsin will be constantly bleached
while the cones are active. In a darkened room, there is not enough light to activate cone opsins, and vision is
entirely dependent on rods. Rods are so sensitive to light that a single photon can result in an action potential from a
rod’s corresponding RGC.
14.1 • Sensory Perception
557
The three types of cone opsins, being sensitive to different wavelengths of light, provide us with color vision. By
comparing the activity of the three different cones, the brain can extract color information from visual stimuli. For
example, a bright blue light that has a wavelength of approximately 450 nm would activate the “red” cones
minimally, the “green” cones marginally, and the “blue” cones predominantly. The relative activation of the three
different cones is calculated by the brain, which perceives the color as blue. However, cones cannot react to low-
intensity light, and rods do not sense the color of light. Therefore, our low-light vision is—in essence—in grayscale. In
other words, in a dark room, everything appears as a shade of gray. If you think that you can see colors in the dark, it
is most likely because your brain knows what color something is and is relying on that memory.
FIGURE 14.18
Comparison of Color Sensitivity of Photopigments
Comparing the peak sensitivity and absorbance spectra of the four
photopigments suggests that they are most sensitive to particular wavelengths.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/occipital) to learn more about a transverse section through the brain that
depicts the visual pathway from the eye to the occipital cortex. The first half of the pathway is the projection from
the RGCs through the optic nerve to the lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus on either side. This first fiber in
the pathway synapses on a thalamic cell that then projects to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe where “seeing,”
or visual perception, takes place. This video gives an abbreviated overview of the visual system by concentrating on
the pathway from the eyes to the occipital lobe. The video makes the statement (at 0:45) that “specialized cells in
the retina called ganglion cells convert the light rays into electrical signals.” What aspect of retinal processing is
simplified by that statement? Explain your answer.
Sensory Nerves
Once any sensory cell transduces a stimulus into a nerve impulse, that impulse has to travel along axons to reach
the CNS. In many of the special senses, the axons leaving the sensory receptors have a topographical arrangement,
meaning that the location of the sensory receptor relates to the location of the axon in the nerve. For example, in the
retina, axons from RGCs in the fovea are located at the center of the optic nerve, where they are surrounded by
axons from the more peripheral RGCs.
Spinal Nerves
Generally, spinal nerves contain afferent axons from sensory receptors in the periphery, such as from the skin,
mixed with efferent axons travelling to the muscles or other effector organs. As the spinal nerve nears the spinal
cord, it splits into dorsal and ventral roots. The dorsal root contains only the axons of sensory neurons, whereas the
ventral roots contain only the axons of the motor neurons. Some of the branches will synapse with local neurons in
the dorsal root ganglion, posterior (dorsal) horn, or even the anterior (ventral) horn, at the level of the spinal cord
where they enter. Other branches will travel a short distance up or down the spine to interact with neurons at other
levels of the spinal cord. A branch may also turn into the posterior (dorsal) column of the white matter to connect
558
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
with the brain. For the sake of convenience, we will use the terms ventral and dorsal in reference to structures within
the spinal cord that are part of these pathways. This will help to underscore the relationships between the different
components. Typically, spinal nerve systems that connect to the brain are contralateral, in that the right side of the
body is connected to the left side of the brain and the left side of the body to the right side of the brain.
Cranial Nerves
Cranial nerves convey specific sensory information from the head and neck directly to the brain. Whereas spinal
information is contralateral, cranial nerve systems, with some exceptions, are mostly ipsilateral, meaning that a
cranial nerve on the right side of the head is connected to the right side of the brain. Some cranial nerves contain
only sensory axons, such as the olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves. Other cranial nerves contain both
sensory and motor axons, including the trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves (however, the vagus
nerve is not associated with the somatic nervous system). The general senses of somatosensation for the face travel
through the trigeminal system.
14.2 Central Processing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the pathways that sensory systems follow into the central nervous system
•
Differentiate between the two major ascending pathways in the spinal cord
•
Describe the pathway of somatosensory input from the face and compare it to the ascending pathways in the
spinal cord
•
Explain topographical representations of sensory information in at least two systems
•
Describe two pathways of visual processing and the functions associated with each
Sensory Pathways
Specific regions of the CNS coordinate different somatic processes using sensory inputs and motor outputs of
peripheral nerves. A simple case is a reflex caused by a synapse between a dorsal sensory neuron axon and a motor
neuron in the ventral horn. More complex arrangements are possible to integrate peripheral sensory information
with higher processes. The important regions of the CNS that play a role in somatic processes can be separated into
the spinal cord brain stem, diencephalon, cerebral cortex, and subcortical structures.
Spinal Cord and Brain Stem
A sensory pathway that carries peripheral sensations to the brain is referred to as an ascending pathway, or
ascending tract. The various sensory modalities each follow specific pathways through the CNS. Tactile and other
somatosensory stimuli activate receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, and joints throughout the entire body.
However, the somatosensory pathways are divided into two separate systems on the basis of the location of the
receptor neurons. Somatosensory stimuli from below the neck pass along the sensory pathways of the spinal cord,
whereas somatosensory stimuli from the head and neck travel through the cranial nerves—specifically, the
trigeminal system.
The dorsal column system (sometimes referred to as the dorsal column–medial lemniscus) and the spinothalamic
tract are two major pathways that bring sensory information to the brain (Figure 14.19). The sensory pathways in
each of these systems are composed of three successive neurons.
The dorsal column system begins with the axon of a dorsal root ganglion neuron entering the dorsal root and joining
the dorsal column white matter in the spinal cord. As axons of this pathway enter the dorsal column, they take on a
positional arrangement so that axons from lower levels of the body position themselves medially, whereas axons
from upper levels of the body position themselves laterally. The dorsal column is separated into two component
tracts, the fasciculus gracilis that contains axons from the legs and lower body, and the fasciculus cuneatus that
contains axons from the upper body and arms.
The axons in the dorsal column terminate in the nuclei of the medulla, where each synapses with the second neuron
in their respective pathway. The nucleus gracilis is the target of fibers in the fasciculus gracilis, whereas the
nucleus cuneatus is the target of fibers in the fasciculus cuneatus. The second neuron in the system projects from
one of the two nuclei and then decussates, or crosses the midline of the medulla. These axons then continue to
14.2 • Central Processing
559
ascend the brain stem as a bundle called the medial lemniscus. These axons terminate in the thalamus, where
each synapses with the third neuron in their respective pathway. The third neuron in the system projects its axons to
the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex, where somatosensory stimuli are initially processed and the conscious
perception of the stimulus occurs.
The spinothalamic tract also begins with neurons in a dorsal root ganglion. These neurons extend their axons to the
dorsal horn, where they synapse with the second neuron in their respective pathway. The name “spinothalamic”
comes from this second neuron, which has its cell body in the spinal cord gray matter and connects to the thalamus.
Axons from these second neurons then decussate within the spinal cord and ascend to the brain and enter the
thalamus, where each synapses with the third neuron in its respective pathway. The neurons in the thalamus then
project their axons to the spinothalamic tract, which synapses in the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex.
These two systems are similar in that they both begin with dorsal root ganglion cells, as with most general sensory
information. The dorsal column system is primarily responsible for touch sensations and proprioception, whereas
the spinothalamic tract pathway is primarily responsible for pain and temperature sensations. Another similarity is
that the second neurons in both of these pathways are contralateral, because they project across the midline to the
other side of the brain or spinal cord. In the dorsal column system, this decussation takes place in the brain stem; in
the spinothalamic pathway, it takes place in the spinal cord at the same spinal cord level at which the information
entered. The third neurons in the two pathways are essentially the same. In both, the second neuron synapses in
the thalamus, and the thalamic neuron projects to the somatosensory cortex.
FIGURE 14.19
Anterior View of Ascending Sensory Pathways of the Spinal Cord
The dorsal column system and spinothalamic tract
are the major ascending pathways that connect the periphery with the brain.
560
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
The trigeminal pathway carries somatosensory information from the face, head, mouth, and nasal cavity. As with the
previously discussed nerve tracts, the sensory pathways of the trigeminal pathway each involve three successive
neurons. First, axons from the trigeminal ganglion enter the brain stem at the level of the pons. These axons project
to one of three locations. The spinal trigeminal nucleus of the medulla receives information similar to that carried
by spinothalamic tract, such as pain and temperature sensations. Other axons go to either the chief sensory
nucleus in the pons or the mesencephalic nuclei in the midbrain. These nuclei receive information like that carried
by the dorsal column system, such as touch, pressure, vibration, and proprioception. Axons from the second neuron
decussate and ascend to the thalamus along the trigeminothalamic tract. In the thalamus, each axon synapses with
the third neuron in its respective pathway. Axons from the third neuron then project from the thalamus to the
primary somatosensory cortex of the cerebrum.
The sensory pathway for gustation travels along the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves, which synapse with
neurons of the solitary nucleus in the brain stem. Axons from the solitary nucleus then project to the ventral
posterior nucleus of the thalamus. Finally, axons from the ventral posterior nucleus project to the gustatory cortex
of the cerebral cortex, where taste is processed and consciously perceived.
The sensory pathway for audition travels along the vestibulocochlear nerve, which synapses with neurons in the
cochlear nuclei of the superior medulla. Within the brain stem, input from either ear is combined to extract location
information from the auditory stimuli. Whereas the initial auditory stimuli received at the cochlea strictly represent
the frequency—or pitch—of the stimuli, the locations of sounds can be determined by comparing information arriving
at both ears.
Sound localization is a feature of central processing in the auditory nuclei of the brain stem. Sound localization is
achieved by the brain calculating the interaural time difference and the interaural intensity difference. A sound
originating from a specific location will arrive at each ear at different times, unless the sound is directly in front of
the listener. If the sound source is slightly to the left of the listener, the sound will arrive at the left ear microseconds
before it arrives at the right ear (Figure 14.20). This time difference is an example of an interaural time difference.
Also, the sound will be slightly louder in the left ear than in the right ear because some of the sound waves reaching
the opposite ear are blocked by the head. This is an example of an interaural intensity difference.
14.2 • Central Processing
561
FIGURE 14.20
Auditory Brain Stem Mechanisms of Sound Localization
Localizing sound in the horizontal plane is achieved by
processing in the medullary nuclei of the auditory system. Connections between neurons on either side are able to compare very slight
differences in sound stimuli that arrive at either ear and represent interaural time and intensity differences.
Auditory processing continues on to a nucleus in the midbrain called the inferior colliculus. Axons from the inferior
colliculus project to two locations, the thalamus and the superior colliculus. The medial geniculate nucleus of the
thalamus receives the auditory information and then projects that information to the auditory cortex in the temporal
lobe of the cerebral cortex. The superior colliculus receives input from the visual and somatosensory systems, as
well as the ears, to initiate stimulation of the muscles that turn the head and neck toward the auditory stimulus.
Balance is coordinated through the vestibular system, the nerves of which are composed of axons from the
vestibular ganglion that carries information from the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals. The system
contributes to controlling head and neck movements in response to vestibular signals. An important function of the
vestibular system is coordinating eye and head movements to maintain visual attention. Most of the axons terminate
in the vestibular nuclei of the medulla. Some axons project from the vestibular ganglion directly to the cerebellum,
562
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
with no intervening synapse in the vestibular nuclei. The cerebellum is primarily responsible for initiating
movements on the basis of equilibrium information.
Neurons in the vestibular nuclei project their axons to targets in the brain stem. One target is the reticular formation,
which influences respiratory and cardiovascular functions in relation to body movements. A second target of the
axons of neurons in the vestibular nuclei is the spinal cord, which initiates the spinal reflexes involved with posture
and balance. To assist the visual system, fibers of the vestibular nuclei project to the oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducens nuclei to influence signals sent along the cranial nerves. These connections constitute the pathway of the
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), which compensates for head and body movement by stabilizing images on the retina
(Figure 14.21). Finally, the vestibular nuclei project to the thalamus to join the proprioceptive pathway of the dorsal
column system, allowing conscious perception of equilibrium.
FIGURE 14.21
Vestibulo-ocular Reflex
Connections between the vestibular system and the cranial nerves controlling eye movement
keep the eyes centered on a visual stimulus, even though the head is moving. During head movement, the eye muscles move the eyes in the
opposite direction as the head movement, keeping the visual stimulus centered in the field of view.
The connections of the optic nerve are more complicated than those of other cranial nerves. Instead of the
connections being between each eye and the brain, visual information is segregated between the left and right sides
of the visual field. In addition, some of the information from one side of the visual field projects to the opposite side
of the brain. Within each eye, the axons projecting from the medial side of the retina decussate at the optic chiasm.
For example, the axons from the medial retina of the left eye cross over to the right side of the brain at the optic
chiasm. However, within each eye, the axons projecting from the lateral side of the retina do not decussate. For
example, the axons from the lateral retina of the right eye project back to the right side of the brain. Therefore the
left field of view of each eye is processed on the right side of the brain, whereas the right field of view of each eye is
processed on the left side of the brain (Figure 14.22).
14.2 • Central Processing
563
FIGURE 14.22
Segregation of Visual Field Information at the Optic Chiasm
Contralateral visual field information from the lateral
retina projects to the ipsilateral brain, whereas ipsilateral visual field information has to decussate at the optic chiasm to reach the opposite
side of the brain. (Note that this is an inferior view.)
A unique clinical presentation that relates to this anatomic arrangement is the loss of lateral peripheral vision,
known as bilateral hemianopia. This is different from “tunnel vision” because the superior and inferior peripheral
fields are not lost. Visual field deficits can be disturbing for a patient, but in this case, the cause is not within the
visual system itself. A growth of the pituitary gland presses against the optic chiasm and interferes with signal
transmission. However, the axons projecting to the same side of the brain are unaffected. Therefore, the patient
loses the outermost areas of their field of vision and cannot see objects to their right and left.
Extending from the optic chiasm, the axons of the visual system are referred to as the optic tract instead of the optic
nerve. The optic tract has three major targets, two in the diencephalon and one in the midbrain. The connection
between the eyes and diencephalon is demonstrated during development, in which the neural tissue of the retina
differentiates from that of the diencephalon by the growth of the secondary vesicles. The connections of the retina
into the CNS are a holdover from this developmental association. The majority of the connections of the optic tract
are to the thalamus—specifically, the lateral geniculate nucleus. Axons from this nucleus then project to the visual
cortex of the cerebrum, located in the occipital lobe. Another target of the optic tract is the superior colliculus.
In addition, a very small number of RGC axons project from the optic chiasm to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
hypothalamus. These RGCs are photosensitive, in that they respond to the presence or absence of light. Unlike the
photoreceptors, however, these photosensitive RGCs cannot be used to perceive images. By simply responding to
the absence or presence of light, these RGCs can send information about day length. The perceived proportion of
sunlight to darkness establishes the circadian rhythm of our bodies, allowing certain physiological events to occur
at approximately the same time every day.
Diencephalon
The diencephalon is beneath the cerebrum and includes the thalamus and hypothalamus. In the somatic nervous
system, the thalamus is an important relay for communication between the cerebrum and the rest of the nervous
system. The hypothalamus has both somatic and autonomic functions. In addition, the hypothalamus
communicates with the limbic system, which controls emotions and memory functions.
564
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
Sensory input to the thalamus comes from most of the special senses and ascending somatosensory tracts. Each
sensory system is relayed through a particular nucleus in the thalamus. The thalamus is a required transfer point for
most sensory tracts that reach the cerebral cortex, where conscious sensory perception begins. The one exception
to this rule is the olfactory system. The olfactory tract axons from the olfactory bulb project directly to the cerebral
cortex, along with the limbic system and hypothalamus.
The thalamus is a collection of several nuclei that can be categorized into three anatomical groups. White matter
running through the thalamus defines the three major regions of the thalamus, which are an anterior nucleus, a
medial nucleus, and a lateral group of nuclei. The anterior nucleus serves as a relay between the hypothalamus and
the emotion and memory-producing limbic system. The medial nuclei serve as a relay for information from the
limbic system and basal ganglia to the cerebral cortex. This allows memory creation during learning, but also
determines alertness. The special and somatic senses connect to the lateral nuclei, where their information is
relayed to the appropriate sensory cortex of the cerebrum.
Cortical Processing
As described earlier, many of the sensory axons are positioned in the same way as their corresponding receptor
cells in the body. This allows identification of the position of a stimulus on the basis of which receptor cells are
sending information. The cerebral cortex also maintains this sensory topography in the particular areas of the cortex
that correspond to the position of the receptor cells. The somatosensory cortex provides an example in which, in
essence, the locations of the somatosensory receptors in the body are mapped onto the somatosensory cortex. This
mapping is often depicted using a sensory homunculus (Figure 14.23).
The term homunculus comes from the Latin word for “little man” and refers to a map of the human body that is laid
across a portion of the cerebral cortex. In the somatosensory cortex, the external genitals, feet, and lower legs are
represented on the medial face of the gyrus within the longitudinal fissure. As the gyrus curves out of the fissure and
along the surface of the parietal lobe, the body map continues through the thighs, hips, trunk, shoulders, arms, and
hands. The head and face are just lateral to the fingers as the gyrus approaches the lateral sulcus. The
representation of the body in this topographical map is medial to lateral from the lower to upper body. It is a
continuation of the topographical arrangement seen in the dorsal column system, where axons from the lower body
are carried in the fasciculus gracilis, whereas axons from the upper body are carried in the fasciculus cuneatus. As
the dorsal column system continues into the medial lemniscus, these relationships are maintained. Also, the head
and neck axons running from the trigeminal nuclei to the thalamus run adjacent to the upper body fibers. The
connections through the thalamus maintain topography such that the anatomic information is preserved. Note that
this correspondence does not result in a perfectly miniature scale version of the body, but rather exaggerates the
more sensitive areas of the body, such as the fingers and lower face. Less sensitive areas of the body, such as the
shoulders and back, are mapped to smaller areas on the cortex.
14.2 • Central Processing
565
FIGURE 14.23
The Sensory Homunculus
A cartoon representation of the sensory homunculus arranged adjacent to the cortical region
in which the processing takes place.
Likewise, the topographic relationship between the retina and the visual cortex is maintained throughout the visual
pathway. The visual field is projected onto the two retinae, as described above, with sorting at the optic chiasm. The
right peripheral visual field falls on the medial portion of the right retina and the lateral portion of the left retina. The
right medial retina then projects across the midline through the optic chiasm. This results in the right visual field
being processed in the left visual cortex. Likewise, the left visual field is processed in the right visual cortex (see
Figure 14.22). Though the chiasm is helping to sort right and left visual information, superior and inferior visual
information is maintained topographically in the visual pathway. Light from the superior visual field falls on the
inferior retina, and light from the inferior visual field falls on the superior retina. This topography is maintained such
that the superior region of the visual cortex processes the inferior visual field and vice versa. Therefore, the visual
field information is inverted and reversed as it enters the visual cortex—up is down, and left is right. However, the
cortex processes the visual information such that the final conscious perception of the visual field is correct. The
topographic relationship is evident in that information from the foveal region of the retina is processed in the center
of the primary visual cortex. Information from the peripheral regions of the retina are correspondingly processed
toward the edges of the visual cortex. Similar to the exaggerations in the sensory homunculus of the somatosensory
cortex, the foveal-processing area of the visual cortex is disproportionately larger than the areas processing
peripheral vision.
In an experiment performed in the 1960s, subjects wore prism glasses so that the visual field was inverted before
reaching the eye. On the first day of the experiment, subjects would duck when walking up to a table, thinking it was
suspended from the ceiling. However, after a few days of acclimation, the subjects behaved as if everything were
represented correctly. Therefore, the visual cortex is somewhat flexible in adapting to the information it receives
from our eyes (Figure 14.24).
566
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.24
Topographic Mapping of the Retina onto the Visual Cortex
The visual field projects onto the retina through the
lenses and falls on the retinae as an inverted, reversed image. The topography of this image is maintained as the visual information travels
through the visual pathway to the cortex.
The cortex has been described as having specific regions that are responsible for processing specific information;
there is the visual cortex, somatosensory cortex, gustatory cortex, etc. However, our experience of these senses is
not divided. Instead, we experience what can be referred to as a seamless percept. Our perceptions of the various
sensory modalities—though distinct in their content—are integrated by the brain so that we experience the world as
a continuous whole.
In the cerebral cortex, sensory processing begins at the primary sensory cortex, then proceeds to an association
area, and finally, into a multimodal integration area. For example, the visual pathway projects from the retinae
through the thalamus to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. This area is primarily in the medial wall within
the longitudinal fissure. Here, visual stimuli begin to be recognized as basic shapes. Edges of objects are recognized
and built into more complex shapes. Also, inputs from both eyes are compared to extract depth information.
Because of the overlapping field of view between the two eyes, the brain can begin to estimate the distance of
stimuli based on binocular depth cues.
14.2 • Central Processing
567
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/l_3-D1) to learn more about how the brain perceives 3-D motion. Similar to
how retinal disparity offers 3-D moviegoers a way to extract 3-D information from the two-dimensional visual field
projected onto the retina, the brain can extract information about movement in space by comparing what the two
eyes see. If movement of a visual stimulus is leftward in one eye and rightward in the opposite eye, the brain
interprets this as movement toward (or away) from the face along the midline. If both eyes see an object moving in
the same direction, but at different rates, what would that mean for spatial movement?
Everyday Connection
Depth Perception, 3-D Movies, and Optical Illusions
The visual field is projected onto the retinal surface, where photoreceptors transduce light energy into neural
signals for the brain to interpret. The retina is a two-dimensional surface, so it does not encode three-
dimensional information. However, we can perceive depth. How is that accomplished?
Two ways in which we can extract depth information from the two-dimensional retinal signal are based on
monocular cues and binocular cues, respectively. Monocular depth cues are those that are the result of
information within the two-dimensional visual field. One object that overlaps another object has to be in front.
Relative size differences are also a cue. For example, if a basketball appears larger than the basket, then the
basket must be further away. On the basis of experience, we can estimate how far away the basket is. Binocular
depth cues compare information represented in the two retinae because they do not see the visual field exactly
the same.
The centers of the two eyes are separated by a small distance, which is approximately 6 to 6.5 cm in most
people. Because of this offset, visual stimuli do not fall on exactly the same spot on both retinae unless we are
fixated directly on them and they fall on the fovea of each retina. All other objects in the visual field, either closer
or farther away than the fixated object, will fall on different spots on the retina. When vision is fixed on an object
in space, closer objects will fall on the lateral retina of each eye, and more distant objects will fall on the medial
retina of either eye (Figure 14.25). This is easily observed by holding a finger up in front of your face as you look
at a more distant object. You will see two images of your finger that represent the two disparate images that are
falling on either retina.
These depth cues, both monocular and binocular, can be exploited to make the brain think there are three
dimensions in two-dimensional information. This is the basis of 3-D movies. The projected image on the screen
is two dimensional, but it has disparate information embedded in it. The 3-D glasses that are available at the
theater filter the information so that only one eye sees one version of what is on the screen, and the other eye
sees the other version. If you take the glasses off, the image on the screen will have varying amounts of blur
because both eyes are seeing both layers of information, and the third dimension will not be evident. Some
optical illusions can take advantage of depth cues as well, though those are more often using monocular cues to
fool the brain into seeing different parts of the scene as being at different depths.
568
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
There are two main regions that surround the primary cortex that are usually referred to as areas V2 and V3 (the
primary visual cortex is area V1). These surrounding areas are the visual association cortex. The visual association
regions develop more complex visual perceptions by adding color and motion information. The information
processed in these areas is then sent to regions of the temporal and parietal lobes. Visual processing has two
separate streams of processing: one into the temporal lobe and one into the parietal lobe. These are the ventral and
dorsal streams, respectively (Figure 14.26). The ventral stream identifies visual stimuli and their significance.
Because the ventral stream uses temporal lobe structures, it begins to interact with the non-visual cortex and may
be important in visual stimuli becoming part of memories. The dorsal stream locates objects in space and helps in
guiding movements of the body in response to visual inputs. The dorsal stream enters the parietal lobe, where it
interacts with somatosensory cortical areas that are important for our perception of the body and its movements.
The dorsal stream can then influence frontal lobe activity where motor functions originate.
FIGURE 14.25
Retinal Disparity
Because of the interocular distance, which results in objects of different distances falling on
different spots of the two retinae, the brain can extract depth perception from the two-dimensional information of the visual field.
14.2 • Central Processing
569
FIGURE 14.26
Ventral and Dorsal Visual Streams
From the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe, visual processing continues in
two streams—one into the temporal lobe and one into the parietal lobe.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The inability to recognize people by their faces is a troublesome problem. It can be caused by trauma, or it may be
inborn. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/faces) to learn more about a person who lost the ability to recognize
faces as the result of an injury. She cannot recognize the faces of close family members or herself. What other
information can a person suffering from prosopagnosia use to figure out whom they are seeing?
Disorders of the...
Brain: Prosopagnosia
The failures of sensory perception can be unusual and debilitating. A particular sensory deficit that inhibits an
important social function of humans is prosopagnosia, or face blindness. The word comes from the Greek words
prosopa, that means “faces,” and agnosia, that means “not knowing.” Some people may feel that they cannot
recognize people easily by their faces. However, a person with prosopagnosia cannot recognize the most
recognizable people in their respective cultures. They would not recognize the face of a celebrity, an important
historical figure, or even a family member like their mother. They may not even recognize their own face.
Prosopagnosia can be caused by trauma to the brain, or it can be present from birth. The exact cause of
proposagnosia and the reason that it happens to some people is unclear. A study of the brains of people born
with the deficit found that a specific region of the brain, the anterior fusiform gyrus of the temporal lobe, is often
underdeveloped. This region of the brain is concerned with the recognition of visual stimuli and its possible
association with memories. Though the evidence is not yet definitive, this region is likely to be where facial
recognition occurs.
Though this can be a devastating condition, people who suffer from it can get by—often by using other cues to
recognize the people they see. Often, the sound of a person’s voice, or the presence of unique cues such as
distinct facial features (a mole, for example) or hair color can help the sufferer recognize a familiar person. In
the video on prosopagnosia provided in this section, a woman is shown having trouble recognizing celebrities,
family members, and herself. In some situations, she can use other cues to help her recognize faces.
570
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 Motor Responses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the components of the basic processing stream for the motor system
•
Describe the pathway of descending motor commands from the cortex to the skeletal muscles
•
Compare different descending pathways, both by structure and function
•
Explain the initiation of movement from the neurological connections
•
Describe several reflex arcs and their functional roles
The defining characteristic of the somatic nervous system is that it controls skeletal muscles. Somatic senses inform
the nervous system about the external environment, but the response to that is through voluntary muscle
movement. The term “voluntary” suggests that there is a conscious decision to make a movement. However, some
aspects of the somatic system use voluntary muscles without conscious control. One example is the ability of our
breathing to switch to unconscious control while we are focused on another task. However, the muscles that are
responsible for the basic process of breathing are also utilized for speech, which is entirely voluntary.
Cortical Responses
Let’s start with sensory stimuli that have been registered through receptor cells and the information relayed to the
CNS along ascending pathways. In the cerebral cortex, the initial processing of sensory perception progresses to
associative processing and then integration in multimodal areas of cortex. These levels of processing can lead to the
incorporation of sensory perceptions into memory, but more importantly, they lead to a response. The completion of
cortical processing through the primary, associative, and integrative sensory areas initiates a similar progression of
motor processing, usually in different cortical areas.
Whereas the sensory cortical areas are located in the occipital, temporal, and parietal lobes, motor functions are
largely controlled by the frontal lobe (See Figure 13.7). The most anterior regions of the frontal lobe—the prefrontal
areas—are important for executive functions, which are those cognitive functions that lead to goal-directed
behaviors. These higher cognitive processes include working memory, which has been called a “mental scratch
pad,” that can help organize and represent information that is not in the immediate environment. The prefrontal lobe
is responsible for aspects of attention, such as inhibiting distracting thoughts and actions so that a person can focus
on a goal and direct behavior toward achieving that goal.
The functions of the prefrontal cortex are integral to the personality of an individual, because it is largely responsible
for what a person intends to do and how they accomplish those plans. A famous case of damage to the prefrontal
cortex is that of Phineas Gage, dating back to 1848. He was a railroad worker who had a metal spike impale his
prefrontal cortex (Figure 14.27). He survived the accident, but according to second-hand accounts, his personality
changed drastically. Friends described him as no longer acting like himself. Whereas he was a hardworking, amiable
man before the accident, he turned into an irritable, temperamental, and lazy man after the accident. Many of the
accounts of his change may have been inflated in the retelling, and some behavior was likely attributable to alcohol
used as a pain medication. However, the accounts suggest that some aspects of his personality did change. Also,
there is new evidence that though his life changed dramatically, he was able to become a functioning stagecoach
driver, suggesting that the brain has the ability to recover even from major trauma such as this.
14.3 • Motor Responses
571
572
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.27
Phineas Gage
The victim of an accident while working on a railroad in 1848, Phineas Gage had a large iron rod impaled
through the prefrontal cortex of his frontal lobe. After the accident, his personality appeared to change, but he eventually learned to cope
with the trauma and lived as a coach driver even after such a traumatic event. (credit b: John M. Harlow, MD)
Secondary Motor Cortices
In generating motor responses, the executive functions of the prefrontal cortex will need to initiate actual
movements. One way to define the prefrontal area is any region of the frontal lobe that does not elicit movement
when electrically stimulated. These are primarily in the anterior part of the frontal lobe. The regions of the frontal
lobe that remain are the regions of the cortex that produce movement. The prefrontal areas project into the
secondary motor cortices, which include the premotor cortex and the supplemental motor area.
Two important regions that assist in planning and coordinating movements are located adjacent to the primary
motor cortex. The premotor cortex is more lateral, whereas the supplemental motor area is more medial and
superior. The premotor area aids in controlling movements of the core muscles to maintain posture during
movement, whereas the supplemental motor area is hypothesized to be responsible for planning and coordinating
movement. The supplemental motor area also manages sequential movements that are based on prior experience
(that is, learned movements). Neurons in these areas are most active leading up to the initiation of movement. For
example, these areas might prepare the body for the movements necessary to drive a car in anticipation of a traffic
light changing.
Adjacent to these two regions are two specialized motor planning centers. The frontal eye fields are responsible for
moving the eyes in response to visual stimuli. There are direct connections between the frontal eye fields and the
superior colliculus. Also, anterior to the premotor cortex and primary motor cortex is Broca’s area. This area is
responsible for controlling movements of the structures of speech production. The area is named after a French
surgeon and anatomist who studied patients who could not produce speech. They did not have impairments to
understanding speech, only to producing speech sounds, suggesting a damaged or underdeveloped Broca’s area.
Primary Motor Cortex
The primary motor cortex is located in the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe. A neurosurgeon, Walter Penfield,
described much of the basic understanding of the primary motor cortex by electrically stimulating the surface of the
14.3 • Motor Responses
573
cerebrum. Penfield would probe the surface of the cortex while the patient was only under local anesthesia so that
he could observe responses to the stimulation. This led to the belief that the precentral gyrus directly stimulated
muscle movement. We now know that the primary motor cortex receives input from several areas that aid in
planning movement, and its principle output stimulates spinal cord neurons to stimulate skeletal muscle
contraction.
The primary motor cortex is arranged in a similar fashion to the primary somatosensory cortex, in that it has a
topographical map of the body, creating a motor homunculus (see Figure 14.23). The neurons responsible for
musculature in the feet and lower legs are in the medial wall of the precentral gyrus, with the thighs, trunk, and
shoulder at the crest of the longitudinal fissure. The hand and face are in the lateral face of the gyrus. Also, the
relative space allotted for the different regions is exaggerated in muscles that have greater enervation. The greatest
amount of cortical space is given to muscles that perform fine, agile movements, such as the muscles of the fingers
and the lower face. The “power muscles” that perform coarser movements, such as the buttock and back muscles,
occupy much less space on the motor cortex.
Descending Pathways
The motor output from the cortex descends into the brain stem and to the spinal cord to control the musculature
through motor neurons. Neurons located in the primary motor cortex, named Betz cells, are large cortical neurons
that synapse with lower motor neurons in the brain stem or in the spinal cord. The two descending pathways
travelled by the axons of Betz cells are the corticobulbar tract and the corticospinal tract, respectively. Both tracts
are named for their origin in the cortex and their targets—either the brain stem (the term “bulbar” refers to the brain
stem as the bulb, or enlargement, at the top of the spinal cord) or the spinal cord.
These two descending pathways are responsible for the conscious or voluntary movements of skeletal muscles. Any
motor command from the primary motor cortex is sent down the axons of the Betz cells to activate lower motor
neurons in either the cranial motor nuclei or in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The axons of the corticobulbar
tract are ipsilateral, meaning they project from the cortex to the motor nucleus on the same side of the nervous
system. Conversely, the axons of the corticospinal tract are largely contralateral, meaning that they cross the
midline of the brain stem or spinal cord and synapse on the opposite side of the body. Therefore, the right motor
cortex of the cerebrum controls muscles on the left side of the body, and vice versa.
The corticospinal tract descends from the cortex through the deep white matter of the cerebrum. It then passes
between the caudate nucleus and putamen of the basal nuclei as a bundle called the internal capsule. The tract
then passes through the midbrain as the cerebral peduncles, after which it burrows through the pons. Upon
entering the medulla, the tracts make up the large white matter tract referred to as the pyramids (Figure 14.28).
The defining landmark of the medullary-spinal border is the pyramidal decussation, which is where most of the
fibers in the corticospinal tract cross over to the opposite side of the brain. At this point, the tract separates into two
parts, which have control over different domains of the musculature.
574
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 14.28
Corticospinal Tract
The major descending tract that controls skeletal muscle movements is the corticospinal tract. It is
composed of two neurons, the upper motor neuron and the lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron has its cell body in the primary
motor cortex of the frontal lobe and synapses on the lower motor neuron, which is in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and projects to the
skeletal muscle in the periphery.
Appendicular Control
The lateral corticospinal tract is composed of the fibers that cross the midline at the pyramidal decussation (see
Figure 14.28). The axons cross over from the anterior position of the pyramids in the medulla to the lateral column
of the spinal cord. These axons are responsible for controlling appendicular muscles.
This influence over the appendicular muscles means that the lateral corticospinal tract is responsible for moving the
muscles of the arms and legs. The ventral horn in both the lower cervical spinal cord and the lumbar spinal cord
both have wider ventral horns, representing the greater number of muscles controlled by these motor neurons. The
14.3 • Motor Responses
575
cervical enlargement is particularly large because there is greater control over the fine musculature of the upper
limbs, particularly of the fingers. The lumbar enlargement is not as significant in appearance because there is less
fine motor control of the lower limbs.
Axial Control
The anterior corticospinal tract is responsible for controlling the muscles of the body trunk (see Figure 14.28).
These axons do not decussate in the medulla. Instead, they remain in an anterior position as they descend the brain
stem and enter the spinal cord. These axons then travel to the spinal cord level at which they synapse with a lower
motor neuron. Upon reaching the appropriate level, the axons decussate, entering the ventral horn on the opposite
side of the spinal cord from which they entered. In the ventral horn, these axons synapse with their corresponding
lower motor neurons. The lower motor neurons are located in the medial regions of the ventral horn, because they
control the axial muscles of the trunk.
Because movements of the body trunk involve both sides of the body, the anterior corticospinal tract is not entirely
contralateral. Some collateral branches of the tract will project into the ipsilateral ventral horn to control synergistic
muscles on that side of the body, or to inhibit antagonistic muscles through interneurons within the ventral horn.
Through the influence of both sides of the body, the anterior corticospinal tract can coordinate postural muscles in
broad movements of the body. These coordinating axons in the anterior corticospinal tract are often considered
bilateral, as they are both ipsilateral and contralateral.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/motorpathway) to learn more about the descending motor pathway for the
somatic nervous system. The autonomic connections are mentioned, which are covered in another chapter. From
this brief video, only some of the descending motor pathway of the somatic nervous system is described. Which
division of the pathway is described and which division is left out?
Extrapyramidal Controls
Other descending connections between the brain and the spinal cord are called the extrapyramidal system. The
name comes from the fact that this system is outside the corticospinal pathway, which includes the pyramids in the
medulla. A few pathways originating from the brain stem contribute to this system.
The tectospinal tract projects from the midbrain to the spinal cord and is important for postural movements that
are driven by the superior colliculus. The name of the tract comes from an alternate name for the superior colliculus,
which is the tectum. The reticulospinal tract connects the reticular system, a diffuse region of gray matter in the
brain stem, with the spinal cord. This tract influences trunk and proximal limb muscles related to posture and
locomotion. The reticulospinal tract also contributes to muscle tone and influences autonomic functions. The
vestibulospinal tract connects the brain stem nuclei of the vestibular system with the spinal cord. This allows
posture, movement, and balance to be modulated on the basis of equilibrium information provided by the vestibular
system.
The pathways of the extrapyramidal system are influenced by subcortical structures. For example, connections
between the secondary motor cortices and the extrapyramidal system modulate spine and cranium movements.
The basal nuclei, which are important for regulating movement initiated by the CNS, influence the extrapyramidal
system as well as its thalamic feedback to the motor cortex.
The conscious movement of our muscles is more complicated than simply sending a single command from the
precentral gyrus down to the proper motor neurons. During the movement of any body part, our muscles relay
information back to the brain, and the brain is constantly sending “revised” instructions back to the muscles. The
cerebellum is important in contributing to the motor system because it compares cerebral motor commands with
proprioceptive feedback. The corticospinal fibers that project to the ventral horn of the spinal cord have branches
that also synapse in the pons, which project to the cerebellum. Also, the proprioceptive sensations of the dorsal
column system have a collateral projection to the medulla that projects to the cerebellum. These two streams of
information are compared in the cerebellar cortex. Conflicts between the motor commands sent by the cerebrum
and body position information provided by the proprioceptors cause the cerebellum to stimulate the red nucleus of
the midbrain. The red nucleus then sends corrective commands to the spinal cord along the rubrospinal tract. The
576
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
name of this tract comes from the word for red that is seen in the English word “ruby.”
A good example of how the cerebellum corrects cerebral motor commands can be illustrated by walking in water. An
original motor command from the cerebrum to walk will result in a highly coordinated set of learned movements.
However, in water, the body cannot actually perform a typical walking movement as instructed. The cerebellum can
alter the motor command, stimulating the leg muscles to take larger steps to overcome the water resistance. The
cerebellum can make the necessary changes through the rubrospinal tract. Modulating the basic command to walk
also relies on spinal reflexes, but the cerebellum is responsible for calculating the appropriate response. When the
cerebellum does not work properly, coordination and balance are severely affected. The most dramatic example of
this is during the overconsumption of alcohol. Alcohol inhibits the ability of the cerebellum to interpret
proprioceptive feedback, making it more difficult to coordinate body movements, such as walking a straight line, or
guide the movement of the hand to touch the tip of the nose.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/NYTmotor) to read about an elderly woman who starts to lose the ability to
control fine movements, such as speech and the movement of limbs. Many of the usual causes were ruled out. It
was not a stroke, Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, or thyroid dysfunction. The next most obvious cause was
medication, so her pharmacist had to be consulted. The side effect of a drug meant to help her sleep had resulted in
changes in motor control. What regions of the nervous system are likely to be the focus of haloperidol side effects?
Ventral Horn Output
The somatic nervous system provides output strictly to skeletal muscles. The lower motor neurons, which are
responsible for the contraction of these muscles, are found in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. These large,
multipolar neurons have a corona of dendrites surrounding the cell body and an axon that extends out of the ventral
horn. This axon travels through the ventral nerve root to join the emerging spinal nerve. The axon is relatively long
because it needs to reach muscles in the periphery of the body. The diameters of cell bodies may be on the order of
hundreds of micrometers to support the long axon; some axons are a meter in length, such as the lumbar motor
neurons that innervate muscles in the first digits of the feet.
The axons will also branch to innervate multiple muscle fibers. Together, the motor neuron and all the muscle fibers
that it controls make up a motor unit. Motor units vary in size. Some may contain up to 1000 muscle fibers, such as
in the quadriceps, or they may only have 10 fibers, such as in an extraocular muscle. The number of muscle fibers
that are part of a motor unit corresponds to the precision of control of that muscle. Also, muscles that have finer
motor control have more motor units connecting to them, and this requires a larger topographical field in the
primary motor cortex.
Motor neuron axons connect to muscle fibers at a neuromuscular junction. This is a specialized synaptic structure at
which multiple axon terminals synapse with the muscle fiber sarcolemma. The synaptic end bulbs of the motor
neurons secrete acetylcholine, which binds to receptors on the sarcolemma. The binding of acetylcholine opens
ligand-gated ion channels, increasing the movement of cations across the sarcolemma. This depolarizes the
sarcolemma, initiating muscle contraction. Whereas other synapses result in graded potentials that must reach a
threshold in the postsynaptic target, activity at the neuromuscular junction reliably leads to muscle fiber contraction
with every nerve impulse received from a motor neuron. However, the strength of contraction and the number of
fibers that contract can be affected by the frequency of the motor neuron impulses.
Reflexes
This chapter began by introducing reflexes as an example of the basic elements of the somatic nervous system.
Simple somatic reflexes do not include the higher centers discussed for conscious or voluntary aspects of
movement. Reflexes can be spinal or cranial, depending on the nerves and central components that are involved.
The example described at the beginning of the chapter involved heat and pain sensations from a hot stove causing
withdrawal of the arm through a connection in the spinal cord that leads to contraction of the biceps brachii. The
description of this withdrawal reflex was simplified, for the sake of the introduction, to emphasize the parts of the
somatic nervous system. But to consider reflexes fully, more attention needs to be given to this example.
14.3 • Motor Responses
577
As you withdraw your hand from the stove, you do not want to slow that reflex down. As the biceps brachii contracts,
the antagonistic triceps brachii needs to relax. Because the neuromuscular junction is strictly excitatory, the biceps
will contract when the motor nerve is active. Skeletal muscles do not actively relax. Instead the motor neuron needs
to “quiet down,” or be inhibited. In the hot-stove withdrawal reflex, this occurs through an interneuron in the spinal
cord. The interneuron’s cell body is located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The interneuron receives a synapse
from the axon of the sensory neuron that detects that the hand is being burned. In response to this stimulation from
the sensory neuron, the interneuron then inhibits the motor neuron that controls the triceps brachii. This is done by
releasing a neurotransmitter or other signal that hyperpolarizes the motor neuron connected to the triceps brachii,
making it less likely to initiate an action potential. With this motor neuron being inhibited, the triceps brachii relaxes.
Without the antagonistic contraction, withdrawal from the hot stove is faster and keeps further tissue damage from
occurring.
Another example of a withdrawal reflex occurs when you step on a painful stimulus, like a tack or a sharp rock. The
nociceptors that are activated by the painful stimulus activate the motor neurons responsible for contraction of the
tibialis anterior muscle. This causes dorsiflexion of the foot. An inhibitory interneuron, activated by a collateral
branch of the nociceptor fiber, will inhibit the motor neurons of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles to cancel
plantar flexion. An important difference in this reflex is that plantar flexion is most likely in progress as the foot is
pressing down onto the tack. Contraction of the tibialis anterior is not the most important aspect of the reflex, as
continuation of plantar flexion will result in further damage from stepping onto the tack.
Another type of reflex is a stretch reflex. In this reflex, when a skeletal muscle is stretched, a muscle spindle
receptor is activated. The axon from this receptor structure will cause direct contraction of the muscle. A collateral
of the muscle spindle fiber will also inhibit the motor neuron of the antagonist muscles. The reflex helps to maintain
muscles at a constant length. A common example of this reflex is the knee jerk that is elicited by a rubber hammer
struck against the patellar ligament in a physical exam.
A specialized reflex to protect the surface of the eye is the corneal reflex, or the eye blink reflex. When the cornea is
stimulated by a tactile stimulus, or even by bright light in a related reflex, blinking is initiated. The sensory
component travels through the trigeminal nerve, which carries somatosensory information from the face, or through
the optic nerve, if the stimulus is bright light. The motor response travels through the facial nerve and innervates the
orbicularis oculi on the same side. This reflex is commonly tested during a physical exam using an air puff or a gentle
touch of a cotton-tipped applicator.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/reflexarc) to learn more about the reflex arc of the corneal reflex. When the
right cornea senses a tactile stimulus, what happens to the left eye? Explain your answer.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/newreflex) to learn more about newborn reflexes. Newborns have a set of
reflexes that are expected to have been crucial to survival before the modern age. These reflexes disappear as the
baby grows, as some of them may be unnecessary as they age. The video demonstrates a reflex called the Babinski
reflex, in which the foot flexes dorsally and the toes splay out when the sole of the foot is lightly scratched. This is
normal for newborns, but it is a sign of reduced myelination of the spinal tract in adults. Why would this reflex be a
problem for an adult?
578
14 • The Somatic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
alkaloid
substance, usually from a plant source, that
is chemically basic with respect to pH and will
stimulate bitter receptors
amacrine cell
type of cell in the retina that connects
to the bipolar cells near the outer synaptic layer and
provides the basis for early image processing within
the retina
ampulla
in the ear, the structure at the base of a
semicircular canal that contains the hair cells and
cupula for transduction of rotational movement of
the head
anosmia
loss of the sense of smell; usually the result
of physical disruption of the first cranial nerve
anterior corticospinal tract
division of the
corticospinal pathway that travels through the
ventral (anterior) column of the spinal cord and
controls axial musculature through the medial
motor neurons in the ventral (anterior) horn
aqueous humor
watery fluid that fills the anterior
chamber containing the cornea, iris, ciliary body,
and lens of the eye
ascending pathway
fiber structure that relays
sensory information from the periphery through the
spinal cord and brain stem to other structures of the
brain
association area
region of cortex connected to a
primary sensory cortical area that further processes
the information to generate more complex sensory
perceptions
audition
sense of hearing
auricle
fleshy external structure of the ear
basilar membrane
in the ear, the floor of the cochlear
duct on which the organ of Corti sits
Betz cells
output cells of the primary motor cortex
that cause musculature to move through synapses
on cranial and spinal motor neurons
binocular depth cues
indications of the distance of
visual stimuli on the basis of slight differences in the
images projected onto either retina
bipolar cell
cell type in the retina that connects the
photoreceptors to the RGCs
Broca’s area
region of the frontal lobe associated
with the motor commands necessary for speech
production
capsaicin
molecule that activates nociceptors by
interacting with a temperature-sensitive ion channel
and is the basis for “hot” sensations in spicy food
cerebral peduncles
segments of the descending
motor pathway that make up the white matter of the
ventral midbrain
cervical enlargement
region of the ventral (anterior)
horn of the spinal cord that has a larger population
of motor neurons for the greater number of and finer
control of muscles of the upper limb
chemoreceptor
sensory receptor cell that is sensitive
to chemical stimuli, such as in taste, smell, or pain
chief sensory nucleus
component of the trigeminal
nuclei that is found in the pons
choroid
highly vascular tissue in the wall of the eye
that supplies the outer retina with blood
ciliary body
smooth muscle structure on the interior
surface of the iris that controls the shape of the lens
through the zonule fibers
circadian rhythm
internal perception of the daily
cycle of light and dark based on retinal activity
related to sunlight
cochlea
auditory portion of the inner ear containing
structures to transduce sound stimuli
cochlear duct
space within the auditory portion of
the inner ear that contains the organ of Corti and is
adjacent to the scala tympani and scala vestibuli on
either side
cone photoreceptor
one of the two types of retinal
receptor cell that is specialized for color vision
through the use of three photopigments distributed
through three separate populations of cells
contralateral
word meaning “on the opposite side,”
as in axons that cross the midline in a fiber tract
cornea
fibrous covering of the anterior region of the
eye that is transparent so that light can pass
through it
corneal reflex
protective response to stimulation of
the cornea causing contraction of the orbicularis
oculi muscle resulting in blinking of the eye
corticobulbar tract
connection between the cortex
and the brain stem responsible for generating
movement
corticospinal tract
connection between the cortex
and the spinal cord responsible for generating
movement
cupula
specialized structure within the base of a
semicircular canal that bends the stereocilia of hair
cells when the head rotates by way of the relative
movement of the enclosed fluid
decussate
to cross the midline, as in fibers that
project from one side of the body to the other
dorsal column system
ascending tract of the spinal
cord associated with fine touch and proprioceptive
sensations
dorsal stream
connections between cortical areas
from the occipital to parietal lobes that are
responsible for the perception of visual motion and
guiding movement of the body in relation to that
motion
14 • Key Terms
579
encapsulated ending
configuration of a sensory
receptor neuron with dendrites surrounded by
specialized structures to aid in transduction of a
particular type of sensation, such as the lamellated
corpuscles in the deep dermis and subcutaneous
tissue
equilibrium
sense of balance that includes
sensations of position and movement of the head
executive functions
cognitive processes of the
prefrontal cortex that lead to directing goal-directed
behavior, which is a precursor to executing motor
commands
external ear
structures on the lateral surface of the
head, including the auricle and the ear canal back to
the tympanic membrane
exteroceptor
sensory receptor that is positioned to
interpret stimuli from the external environment,
such as photoreceptors in the eye or somatosensory
receptors in the skin
extraocular muscle
one of six muscles originating
out of the bones of the orbit and inserting into the
surface of the eye which are responsible for moving
the eye
extrapyramidal system
pathways between the brain
and spinal cord that are separate from the
corticospinal tract and are responsible for
modulating the movements generated through that
primary pathway
fasciculus cuneatus
lateral division of the dorsal
column system composed of fibers from sensory
neurons in the upper body
fasciculus gracilis
medial division of the dorsal
column system composed of fibers from sensory
neurons in the lower body
fibrous tunic
outer layer of the eye primarily
composed of connective tissue known as the sclera
and cornea
fovea
exact center of the retina at which visual
stimuli are focused for maximal acuity, where the
retina is thinnest, at which there is nothing but
photoreceptors
free nerve ending
configuration of a sensory receptor
neuron with dendrites in the connective tissue of
the organ, such as in the dermis of the skin, that are
most often sensitive to chemical, thermal, and
mechanical stimuli
frontal eye fields
area of the prefrontal cortex
responsible for moving the eyes to attend to visual
stimuli
general sense
any sensory system that is distributed
throughout the body and incorporated into organs of
multiple other systems, such as the walls of the
digestive organs or the skin
gustation
sense of taste
gustatory receptor cells
sensory cells in the taste
bud that transduce the chemical stimuli of gustation
hair cells
mechanoreceptor cells found in the inner
ear that transduce stimuli for the senses of hearing
and balance
incus
(also, anvil) ossicle of the middle ear that
connects the malleus to the stapes
inferior colliculus
last structure in the auditory
brainstem pathway that projects to the thalamus
and superior colliculus
inferior oblique
extraocular muscle responsible for
lateral rotation of the eye
inferior rectus
extraocular muscle responsible for
looking down
inner ear
structure within the temporal bone that
contains the sensory apparati of hearing and
balance
inner segment
in the eye, the section of a
photoreceptor that contains the nucleus and other
major organelles for normal cellular functions
inner synaptic layer
layer in the retina where bipolar
cells connect to RGCs
interaural intensity difference
cue used to aid sound
localization in the horizontal plane that compares
the relative loudness of sounds at the two ears,
because the ear closer to the sound source will hear
a slightly more intense sound
interaural time difference
cue used to help with
sound localization in the horizontal plane that
compares the relative time of arrival of sounds at
the two ears, because the ear closer to the sound
source will receive the stimulus microseconds
before the other ear
internal capsule
segment of the descending motor
pathway that passes between the caudate nucleus
and the putamen
interoceptor
sensory receptor that is positioned to
interpret stimuli from internal organs, such as
stretch receptors in the wall of blood vessels
ipsilateral
word meaning on the same side, as in
axons that do not cross the midline in a fiber tract
iris
colored portion of the anterior eye that surrounds
the pupil
kinesthesia
sense of body movement based on
sensations in skeletal muscles, tendons, joints, and
the skin
lacrimal duct
duct in the medial corner of the orbit
that drains tears into the nasal cavity
lacrimal gland
gland lateral to the orbit that
produces tears to wash across the surface of the
eye
lateral corticospinal tract
division of the
580
14 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
corticospinal pathway that travels through the
lateral column of the spinal cord and controls
appendicular musculature through the lateral motor
neurons in the ventral (anterior) horn
lateral geniculate nucleus
thalamic target of the
RGCs that projects to the visual cortex
lateral rectus
extraocular muscle responsible for
abduction of the eye
lens
component of the eye that focuses light on the
retina
levator palpebrae superioris
muscle that causes
elevation of the upper eyelid, controlled by fibers in
the oculomotor nerve
lumbar enlargement
region of the ventral (anterior)
horn of the spinal cord that has a larger population
of motor neurons for the greater number of muscles
of the lower limb
macula
enlargement at the base of a semicircular
canal at which transduction of equilibrium stimuli
takes place within the ampulla
malleus
(also, hammer) ossicle that is directly
attached to the tympanic membrane
mechanoreceptor
receptor cell that transduces
mechanical stimuli into an electrochemical signal
medial geniculate nucleus
thalamic target of the
auditory brain stem that projects to the auditory
cortex
medial lemniscus
fiber tract of the dorsal column
system that extends from the nuclei gracilis and
cuneatus to the thalamus, and decussates
medial rectus
extraocular muscle responsible for
adduction of the eye
mesencephalic nucleus
component of the trigeminal
nuclei that is found in the midbrain
middle ear
space within the temporal bone between
the ear canal and bony labyrinth where the ossicles
amplify sound waves from the tympanic membrane
to the oval window
multimodal integration area
region of the cerebral
cortex in which information from more than one
sensory modality is processed to arrive at higher
level cortical functions such as memory, learning, or
cognition
neural tunic
layer of the eye that contains nervous
tissue, namely the retina
nociceptor
receptor cell that senses pain stimuli
nucleus cuneatus
medullary nucleus at which first-
order neurons of the dorsal column system synapse
specifically from the upper body and arms
nucleus gracilis
medullary nucleus at which first-
order neurons of the dorsal column system synapse
specifically from the lower body and legs
odorant molecules
volatile chemicals that bind to
receptor proteins in olfactory neurons to stimulate
the sense of smell
olfaction
sense of smell
olfactory bulb
central target of the first cranial nerve;
located on the ventral surface of the frontal lobe in
the cerebrum
olfactory epithelium
region of the nasal epithelium
where olfactory neurons are located
olfactory sensory neuron
receptor cell of the
olfactory system, sensitive to the chemical stimuli of
smell, the axons of which compose the first cranial
nerve
opsin
protein that contains the photosensitive
cofactor retinal for phototransduction
optic chiasm
decussation point in the visual system
at which medial retina fibers cross to the other side
of the brain
optic disc
spot on the retina at which RGC axons
leave the eye and blood vessels of the inner retina
pass
optic nerve
second cranial nerve, which is
responsible visual sensation
optic tract
name for the fiber structure containing
axons from the retina posterior to the optic chiasm
representing their CNS location
organ of Corti
structure in the cochlea in which hair
cells transduce movements from sound waves into
electrochemical signals
osmoreceptor
receptor cell that senses differences in
the concentrations of bodily fluids on the basis of
osmotic pressure
ossicles
three small bones in the middle ear
otolith
layer of calcium carbonate crystals located on
top of the otolithic membrane
otolithic membrane
gelatinous substance in the
utricle and saccule of the inner ear that contains
calcium carbonate crystals and into which the
stereocilia of hair cells are embedded
outer segment
in the eye, the section of a
photoreceptor that contains opsin molecules that
transduce light stimuli
outer synaptic layer
layer in the retina at which
photoreceptors connect to bipolar cells
oval window
membrane at the base of the cochlea
where the stapes attaches, marking the beginning of
the scala vestibuli
palpebral conjunctiva
membrane attached to the
inner surface of the eyelids that covers the anterior
surface of the cornea
papilla
for gustation, a bump-like projection on the
surface of the tongue that contains taste buds
photoisomerization
chemical change in the retinal
molecule that alters the bonding so that it switches
14 • Key Terms
581
from the 11-cis-retinal isomer to the
all-trans-retinal isomer
photon
individual “packet” of light
photoreceptor
receptor cell specialized to respond to
light stimuli
premotor cortex
cortical area anterior to the primary
motor cortex that is responsible for planning
movements
primary sensory cortex
region of the cerebral cortex
that initially receives sensory input from an
ascending pathway from the thalamus and begins
the processing that will result in conscious
perception of that modality
proprioception
sense of position and movement of
the body
proprioceptor
receptor cell that senses changes in
the position and kinesthetic aspects of the body
pupil
open hole at the center of the iris that light
passes through into the eye
pyramidal decussation
location at which
corticospinal tract fibers cross the midline and
segregate into the anterior and lateral divisions of
the pathway
pyramids
segment of the descending motor pathway
that travels in the anterior position of the medulla
receptor cell
cell that transduces environmental
stimuli into neural signals
red nucleus
midbrain nucleus that sends corrective
commands to the spinal cord along the rubrospinal
tract, based on disparity between an original
command and the sensory feedback from
movement
reticulospinal tract
extrapyramidal connections
between the brain stem and spinal cord that
modulate movement, contribute to posture, and
regulate muscle tone
retina
nervous tissue of the eye at which
phototransduction takes place
retinal
cofactor in an opsin molecule that undergoes
a biochemical change when struck by a photon
(pronounced with a stress on the last syllable)
retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
neuron of the retina that
projects along the second cranial nerve
rhodopsin
photopigment molecule found in the rod
photoreceptors
rod photoreceptor
one of the two types of retinal
receptor cell that is specialized for low-light vision
round window
membrane that marks the end of the
scala tympani
rubrospinal tract
descending motor control pathway,
originating in the red nucleus, that mediates control
of the limbs on the basis of cerebellar processing
saccule
structure of the inner ear responsible for
transducing linear acceleration in the vertical plane
scala tympani
portion of the cochlea that extends
from the apex to the round window
scala vestibuli
portion of the cochlea that extends
from the oval window to the apex
sclera
white of the eye
semicircular canals
structures within the inner ear
responsible for transducing rotational movement
information
sensory homunculus
topographic representation of
the body within the somatosensory cortex
demonstrating the correspondence between
neurons processing stimuli and sensitivity
sensory modality
a particular system for interpreting
and perceiving environmental stimuli by the nervous
system
solitary nucleus
medullar nucleus that receives taste
information from the facial and glossopharyngeal
nerves
somatosensation
general sense associated with
modalities lumped together as touch
special sense
any sensory system associated with a
specific organ structure, namely smell, taste, sight,
hearing, and balance
spinal trigeminal nucleus
component of the
trigeminal nuclei that is found in the medulla
spinothalamic tract
ascending tract of the spinal
cord associated with pain and temperature
sensations
spiral ganglion
location of neuronal cell bodies that
transmit auditory information along the eighth
cranial nerve
stapes
(also, stirrup) ossicle of the middle ear that is
attached to the inner ear
stereocilia
array of apical membrane extensions in a
hair cell that transduce movements when they are
bent
stretch reflex
response to activation of the muscle
spindle stretch receptor that causes contraction of
the muscle to maintain a constant length
submodality
specific sense within a broader major
sense such as sweet as a part of the sense of taste,
or color as a part of vision
superior colliculus
structure in the midbrain that
combines visual, auditory, and somatosensory input
to coordinate spatial and topographic
representations of the three sensory systems
superior oblique
extraocular muscle responsible for
medial rotation of the eye
superior rectus
extraocular muscle responsible for
looking up
supplemental motor area
cortical area anterior to
the primary motor cortex that is responsible for
582
14 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
planning movements
suprachiasmatic nucleus
hypothalamic target of the
retina that helps to establish the circadian rhythm of
the body on the basis of the presence or absence of
daylight
taste buds
structures within a papilla on the tongue
that contain gustatory receptor cells
tectorial membrane
component of the organ of Corti
that lays over the hair cells, into which the
stereocilia are embedded
tectospinal tract
extrapyramidal connections
between the superior colliculus and spinal cord
thermoreceptor
sensory receptor specialized for
temperature stimuli
topographical
relating to positional information
transduction
process of changing an environmental
stimulus into the electrochemical signals of the
nervous system
trochlea
cartilaginous structure that acts like a pulley
for the superior oblique muscle
tympanic membrane
ear drum
umami
taste submodality for sensitivity to the
concentration of amino acids; also called the savory
sense
utricle
structure of the inner ear responsible for
transducing linear acceleration in the horizontal
plane
vascular tunic
middle layer of the eye primarily
composed of connective tissue with a rich blood
supply
ventral posterior nucleus
nucleus in the thalamus
that is the target of gustatory sensations and
projects to the cerebral cortex
ventral stream
connections between cortical areas
from the occipital lobe to the temporal lobe that are
responsible for identification of visual stimuli
vestibular ganglion
location of neuronal cell bodies
that transmit equilibrium information along the
eighth cranial nerve
vestibular nuclei
targets of the vestibular component
of the eighth cranial nerve
vestibule
in the ear, the portion of the inner ear
responsible for the sense of equilibrium
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR)
reflex based on
connections between the vestibular system and the
cranial nerves of eye movements that ensures
images are stabilized on the retina as the head and
body move
vestibulospinal tract
extrapyramidal connections
between the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem and
spinal cord that modulate movement and contribute
to balance on the basis of the sense of equilibrium
visceral sense
sense associated with the internal
organs
vision
special sense of sight based on transduction of
light stimuli
visual acuity
property of vision related to the
sharpness of focus, which varies in relation to
retinal position
vitreous humor
viscous fluid that fills the posterior
chamber of the eye
working memory
function of the prefrontal cortex to
maintain a representation of information that is not
in the immediate environment
zonule fibers
fibrous connections between the ciliary
body and the lens
Chapter Review
14.1 Sensory Perception
The senses are olfaction (smell), gustation (taste),
somatosensation (sensations associated with the skin
and body), audition (hearing), equilibrium (balance),
and vision. With the exception of somatosensation, this
list represents the special senses, or those systems of
the body that are associated with specific organs such
as the tongue or eye. Somatosensation belongs to the
general senses, which are those sensory structures
that are distributed throughout the body and in the
walls of various organs. The special senses are all
primarily part of the somatic nervous system in that
they are consciously perceived through cerebral
processes, though some special senses contribute to
autonomic function. The general senses can be divided
into somatosensation, which is commonly considered
touch, but includes tactile, pressure, vibration,
temperature, and pain perception. The general senses
also include the visceral senses, which are separate
from the somatic nervous system function in that they
do not normally rise to the level of conscious
perception.
The cells that transduce sensory stimuli into the
electrochemical signals of the nervous system are
classified on the basis of structural or functional
aspects of the cells. The structural classifications are
either based on the anatomy of the cell that is
interacting with the stimulus (free nerve endings,
encapsulated endings, or specialized receptor cell), or
where the cell is located relative to the stimulus
(interoceptor, exteroceptor, proprioceptor). Thirdly, the
functional classification is based on how the cell
transduces the stimulus into a neural signal.
Chemoreceptors respond to chemical stimuli and are
the basis for olfaction and gustation. Related to
chemoreceptors are osmoreceptors and nociceptors
14 • Chapter Review
583
for fluid balance and pain reception, respectively.
Mechanoreceptors respond to mechanical stimuli and
are the basis for most aspects of somatosensation, as
well as being the basis of audition and equilibrium in
the inner ear. Thermoreceptors are sensitive to
temperature changes, and photoreceptors are
sensitive to light energy.
The nerves that convey sensory information from the
periphery to the CNS are either spinal nerves,
connected to the spinal cord, or cranial nerves,
connected to the brain. Spinal nerves have mixed
populations of fibers; some are motor fibers and some
are sensory. The sensory fibers connect to the spinal
cord through the dorsal root, which is attached to the
dorsal root ganglion. Sensory information from the
body that is conveyed through spinal nerves will
project to the opposite side of the brain to be
processed by the cerebral cortex. The cranial nerves
can be strictly sensory fibers, such as the olfactory,
optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves, or mixed sensory
and motor nerves, such as the trigeminal, facial,
glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves. The cranial
nerves are connected to the same side of the brain
from which the sensory information originates.
14.2 Central Processing
Sensory input to the brain enters through pathways
that travel through either the spinal cord (for
somatosensory input from the body) or the brain stem
(for everything else, except the visual and olfactory
systems) to reach the diencephalon. In the
diencephalon, sensory pathways reach the thalamus.
This is necessary for all sensory systems to reach the
cerebral cortex, except for the olfactory system that is
directly connected to the frontal and temporal lobes.
The two major tracts in the spinal cord, originating from
sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia, are the
dorsal column system and the spinothalamic tract. The
major differences between the two are in the type of
information that is relayed to the brain and where the
tracts decussate. The dorsal column system primarily
carries information about touch and proprioception and
crosses the midline in the medulla. The spinothalamic
tract is primarily responsible for pain and temperature
sensation and crosses the midline in the spinal cord at
the level at which it enters. The trigeminal nerve adds
similar sensation information from the head to these
pathways.
The auditory pathway passes through multiple nuclei in
the brain stem in which additional information is
extracted from the basic frequency stimuli processed
by the cochlea. Sound localization is made possible
through the activity of these brain stem structures. The
vestibular system enters the brain stem and influences
activity in the cerebellum, spinal cord, and cerebral
cortex.
The visual pathway segregates information from the
two eyes so that one half of the visual field projects to
the other side of the brain. Within visual cortical areas,
the perception of the stimuli and their location is
passed along two streams, one ventral and one dorsal.
The ventral visual stream connects to structures in the
temporal lobe that are important for long-term
memory formation. The dorsal visual stream interacts
with the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe, and
together they can influence the activity in the frontal
lobe to generate movements of the body in relation to
visual information.
14.3 Motor Responses
The motor components of the somatic nervous system
begin with the frontal lobe of the brain, where the
prefrontal cortex is responsible for higher functions
such as working memory. The integrative and associate
functions of the prefrontal lobe feed into the secondary
motor areas, which help plan movements. The
premotor cortex and supplemental motor area then
feed into the primary motor cortex that initiates
movements. Large Betz cells project through the
corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts to synapse on
lower motor neurons in the brain stem and ventral horn
of the spinal cord, respectively. These connections are
responsible for generating movements of skeletal
muscles.
The extrapyramidal system includes projections from
the brain stem and higher centers that influence
movement, mostly to maintain balance and posture, as
well as to maintain muscle tone. The superior colliculus
and red nucleus in the midbrain, the vestibular nuclei in
the medulla, and the reticular formation throughout the
brain stem each have tracts projecting to the spinal
cord in this system. Descending input from the
secondary motor cortices, basal nuclei, and cerebellum
connect to the origins of these tracts in the brain stem.
All of these motor pathways project to the spinal cord
to synapse with motor neurons in the ventral horn of
the spinal cord. These lower motor neurons are the
cells that connect to skeletal muscle and cause
contractions. These neurons project through the spinal
nerves to connect to the muscles at neuromuscular
junctions. One motor neuron connects to multiple
muscle fibers within a target muscle. The number of
fibers that are innervated by a single motor neuron
varies on the basis of the precision necessary for that
584
14 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
muscle and the amount of force necessary for that
motor unit. The quadriceps, for example, have many
fibers controlled by single motor neurons for powerful
contractions that do not need to be precise. The
extraocular muscles have only a small number of fibers
controlled by each motor neuron because moving the
eyes does not require much force, but needs to be very
precise.
Reflexes are the simplest circuits within the somatic
nervous system. A withdrawal reflex from a painful
stimulus only requires the sensory fiber that enters the
spinal cord and the motor neuron that projects to a
muscle. Antagonist and postural muscles can be
coordinated with the withdrawal, making the
connections more complex. The simple, single
neuronal connection is the basis of somatic reflexes.
The corneal reflex is contraction of the orbicularis oculi
muscle to blink the eyelid when something touches the
surface of the eye. Stretch reflexes maintain a constant
length of muscles by causing a contraction of a muscle
to compensate for a stretch that can be sensed by a
specialized receptor called a muscle spindle.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
DanielleReed) to learn about Dr. Danielle Reed of
the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia,
PA, who became interested in science at an early
age because of her sensory experiences. She
recognized that her sense of taste was unique
compared with other people she knew. Now, she
studies the genetic differences between people and
their sensitivities to taste stimuli. In the video,
there is a brief image of a person sticking out their
tongue, which has been covered with a colored dye.
This is how Dr. Reed is able to visualize and count
papillae on the surface of the tongue. People fall
into two large groups known as “tasters” and “non-
tasters” on the basis of the density of papillae on
their tongue, which also indicates the number of
taste buds. Non-tasters can taste food, but they are
not as sensitive to certain tastes, such as
bitterness. Dr. Reed discovered that she is a non-
taster, which explains why she perceived bitterness
differently than other people she knew. Are you
very sensitive to tastes? Can you see any
similarities among the members of your family?
2. Figure 14.9 The basilar membrane is the thin
membrane that extends from the central core of the
cochlea to the edge. What is anchored to this
membrane so that they can be activated by
movement of the fluids within the cochlea?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ear1) to
learn more about how the structures of the ear
convert sound waves into a neural signal by moving
the “hairs,” or stereocilia, of the cochlear duct.
Specific locations along the length of the duct
encode specific frequencies, or pitches. The brain
interprets the meaning of the sounds we hear as
music, speech, noise, etc. Which ear structures are
responsible for the amplification and transfer of
sound from the external ear to the inner ear?
4. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/ear2) to
learn more about the inner ear and to see the
cochlea unroll, with the base at the back of the
image and the apex at the front. Specific
wavelengths of sound cause specific regions of the
basilar membrane to vibrate, much like the keys of
a piano produce sound at different frequencies.
Based on the animation, where do
frequencies—from high to low pitches—cause
activity in the hair cells within the cochlear duct?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/occipital) to
learn more about a transverse section through the
brain that depicts the visual pathway from the eye
to the occipital cortex. The first half of the pathway
is the projection from the RGCs through the optic
nerve to the lateral geniculate nucleus in the
thalamus on either side. This first fiber in the
pathway synapses on a thalamic cell that then
projects to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe
where “seeing,” or visual perception, takes place.
This video gives an abbreviated overview of the
visual system by concentrating on the pathway from
the eyes to the occipital lobe. The video makes the
statement (at 0:45) that “specialized cells in the
retina called ganglion cells convert the light rays
into electrical signals.” What aspect of retinal
processing is simplified by that statement? Explain
your answer.
14 • Interactive Link Questions
585
6. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/l_3-D1) to
learn more about how the brain perceives 3-D
motion. Similar to how retinal disparity offers 3-D
moviegoers a way to extract 3-D information from
the two-dimensional visual field projected onto the
retina, the brain can extract information about
movement in space by comparing what the two
eyes see. If movement of a visual stimulus is
leftward in one eye and rightward in the opposite
eye, the brain interprets this as movement toward
(or away) from the face along the midline. If both
eyes see an object moving in the same direction,
but at different rates, what would that mean for
spatial movement?
7. The inability to recognize people by their faces is a
troublesome problem. It can be caused by trauma,
or it may be inborn. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/faces) to learn more about a
person who lost the ability to recognize faces as the
result of an injury. She cannot recognize the faces of
close family members or herself. What other
information can a person suffering from
prosopagnosia use to figure out whom they are
seeing?
8. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
motorpathway) to learn more about the descending
motor pathway for the somatic nervous system. The
autonomic connections are mentioned, which are
covered in another chapter. From this brief video,
only some of the descending motor pathway of the
somatic nervous system is described. Which
division of the pathway is described and which
division is left out?
9. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/NYTmotor) to
read about an elderly woman who starts to lose the
ability to control fine movements, such as speech
and the movement of limbs. Many of the usual
causes were ruled out. It was not a stroke,
Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, or thyroid
dysfunction. The next most obvious cause was
medication, so her pharmacist had to be consulted.
The side effect of a drug meant to help her sleep
had resulted in changes in motor control. What
regions of the nervous system are likely to be the
focus of haloperidol side effects?
10. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/reflexarc)
to learn more about the reflex arc of the corneal
reflex. When the right cornea senses a tactile
stimulus, what happens to the left eye? Explain
your answer.
11. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/newreflex)
to learn more about newborn reflexes. Newborns
have a set of reflexes that are expected to have
been crucial to survival before the modern age.
These reflexes disappear as the baby grows, as
some of them may be unnecessary as they age.
The video demonstrates a reflex called the
Babinski reflex, in which the foot flexes dorsally
and the toes splay out when the sole of the foot is
lightly scratched. This is normal for newborns, but
it is a sign of reduced myelination of the spinal
tract in adults. Why would this reflex be a problem
for an adult?
Review Questions
12. What type of receptor cell is responsible for
transducing pain stimuli?
a.
mechanoreceptor
b.
nociceptor
c.
osmoreceptor
d.
photoreceptor
13. Which of these cranial nerves is part of the
gustatory system?
a.
olfactory
b.
trochlear
c.
trigeminal
d.
facial
14. Which submodality of taste is sensitive to the pH
of saliva?
a.
umami
b.
sour
c.
bitter
d.
sweet
15. Axons from which neuron in the retina make up
the optic nerve?
a.
amacrine cells
b.
photoreceptors
c.
bipolar cells
d.
retinal ganglion cells
586
14 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
16. What type of receptor cell is involved in the
sensations of sound and balance?
a.
photoreceptor
b.
chemoreceptor
c.
mechanoreceptor
d.
nociceptor
17. Which of these sensory modalities does not pass
through the ventral posterior thalamus?
a.
gustatory
b.
proprioception
c.
audition
d.
nociception
18. Which nucleus in the medulla is connected to the
inferior colliculus?
a.
solitary nucleus
b.
vestibular nucleus
c.
chief sensory nucleus
d.
cochlear nucleus
19. Visual stimuli in the upper-left visual field will be
processed in what region of the primary visual
cortex?
a.
inferior right
b.
inferior left
c.
superior right
d.
superior left
20. Which location on the body has the largest region
of somatosensory cortex representing it,
according to the sensory homunculus?
a.
lips
b.
thigh
c.
elbow
d.
neck
21. Which of the following is a direct target of the
vestibular ganglion?
a.
superior colliculus
b.
cerebellum
c.
thalamus
d.
optic chiasm
22. Which region of the frontal lobe is responsible for
initiating movement by directly connecting to
cranial and spinal motor neurons?
a.
prefrontal cortex
b.
supplemental motor area
c.
premotor cortex
d.
primary motor cortex
23. Which extrapyramidal tract incorporates
equilibrium sensations with motor commands to
aid in posture and movement?
a.
tectospinal tract
b.
vestibulospinal tract
c.
reticulospinal tract
d.
corticospinal tract
24. Which region of gray matter in the spinal cord
contains motor neurons that innervate skeletal
muscles?
a.
ventral horn
b.
dorsal horn
c.
lateral horn
d.
lateral column
25. What type of reflex can protect the foot when a
painful stimulus is sensed?
a.
stretch reflex
b.
gag reflex
c.
withdrawal reflex
d.
corneal reflex
26. What is the name for the topographical
representation of the sensory input to the
somatosensory cortex?
a.
homunculus
b.
homo sapiens
c.
postcentral gyrus
d.
primary cortex
Critical Thinking Questions
27. The sweetener known as stevia can replace
glucose in food. What does the molecular
similarity of stevia to glucose mean for the
gustatory sense?
28. Why does the blind spot from the optic disc in
either eye not result in a blind spot in the visual
field?
29. Following a motorcycle accident, the victim loses
the ability to move the right leg but has normal
control over the left one, suggesting a hemisection
somewhere in the thoracic region of the spinal
cord. What sensory deficits would be expected in
terms of touch versus pain? Explain your answer.
30. A pituitary tumor can cause perceptual losses in
the lateral visual field. The pituitary gland is
located directly inferior to the hypothalamus. Why
would this happen?
14 • Critical Thinking Questions
587
31. The prefrontal lobotomy is a drastic—and largely
out-of-practice—procedure used to disconnect
that portion of the cerebral cortex from the rest of
the frontal lobe and the diencephalon as a
psychiatric therapy. Why would this have been
thought necessary for someone with a potentially
uncontrollable behavior?
32. If a reflex is a limited circuit within the somatic
system, why do physical and neurological exams
include them to test the health of an individual?
588
14 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 15
The Autonomic Nervous System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the components of the autonomic nervous system
•
Differentiate between the structures of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions in the autonomic
nervous system
•
Name the components of a visceral reflex specific to the autonomic division to which it belongs
•
Predict the response of a target effector to autonomic input on the basis of the released signaling molecule
•
Describe how the central nervous system coordinates and contributes to autonomic functions
The autonomic nervous system is often associated with the “fight-or-flight response,” which
refers to the preparation of the body to either run away from a threat or to stand and fight in the face of that threat.
To suggest what this means, consider the (very unlikely) situation of seeing a lioness hunting out on the savannah.
Though this is not a common threat that humans deal with in the modern world, it represents the type of
environment in which the human species thrived and adapted. The spread of humans around the world to the
present state of the modern age occurred much more quickly than any species would adapt to environmental
pressures such as predators. However, the reactions modern humans have in the modern world are based on these
prehistoric situations. If your boss is walking down the hallway on Friday afternoon looking for “volunteers” to come
in on the weekend, your response is the same as the prehistoric human seeing the lioness running across the
savannah: fight or flight.
Most likely, your response to your boss—not to mention the lioness—would be flight. Run away! The autonomic
system is responsible for the physiological response to make that possible, and hopefully successful. Adrenaline
starts to flood your circulatory system. Your heart rate increases. Sweat glands become active. The bronchi of the
lungs dilate to allow more air exchange. Pupils dilate to increase visual information. Blood pressure increases in
general, and blood vessels dilate in skeletal muscles. Time to run. Similar physiological responses would occur in
preparation for fighting off the threat.
This response should sound a bit familiar. The autonomic nervous system is tied into emotional responses as well,
Figure 15.1
Fight or Flight? Though the threats that modern humans face are not large predators, the autonomic nervous system is
adapted to this type of stimulus. The modern world presents stimuli that trigger the same response. (credit: Vernon Swanepoel)
and the fight-or-flight response probably sounds like a panic attack. In the modern world, these sorts of reactions
are associated with anxiety as much as with response to a threat. It is engrained in the nervous system to respond
like this. In fact, the adaptations of the autonomic nervous system probably predate the human species and are
likely to be common to all mammals, and perhaps shared by many animals. That lioness might herself be threatened
in some other situation.
However, the autonomic nervous system is not just about responding to threats. Besides the fight-or-flight
response, there are the responses referred to as “rest and digest.” If that lioness is successful in her hunting, then
she is going to rest from the exertion. Her heart rate will slow. Breathing will return to normal. The digestive system
has a big job to do. Much of the function of the autonomic system is based on the connections within an autonomic,
or visceral, reflex.
15.1 Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Name the components that generate the sympathetic and parasympathetic responses of the autonomic
nervous system
•
Explain the differences in output connections within the two divisions of the autonomic nervous system
•
Describe the signaling molecules and receptor proteins involved in communication within the two divisions of
the autonomic nervous system
The nervous system can be divided into two functional parts: the somatic nervous system and the autonomic
nervous system. The major differences between the two systems are evident in the responses that each produces.
The somatic nervous system causes contraction of skeletal muscles. The autonomic nervous system controls
cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as glandular tissue. The somatic nervous system is associated with voluntary
responses (though many can happen without conscious awareness, like breathing), and the autonomic nervous
system is associated with involuntary responses, such as those related to homeostasis.
The autonomic nervous system regulates many of the internal organs through a balance of two aspects, or divisions.
In addition to the endocrine system, the autonomic nervous system is instrumental in homeostatic mechanisms in
the body. The two divisions of the autonomic nervous system are the sympathetic division and the
parasympathetic division. The sympathetic system is associated with the fight-or-flight response, and
parasympathetic activity is referred to by the epithet of rest and digest. Homeostasis is the balance between the
two systems. At each target effector, dual innervation determines activity. For example, the heart receives
connections from both the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. One causes heart rate to increase, whereas
the other causes heart rate to decrease.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/fightflight) to learn more about adrenaline and the fight-or-flight response.
When someone is said to have a rush of adrenaline, the image of bungee jumpers or skydivers usually comes to
mind. But adrenaline, also known as epinephrine, is an important chemical in coordinating the body’s fight-or-flight
response. In this video, you look inside the physiology of the fight-or-flight response, as envisioned for a firefighter.
His body’s reaction is the result of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system causing system-wide
changes as it prepares for extreme responses. What two changes does adrenaline bring about to help the skeletal
muscle response?
Sympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
To respond to a threat—to fight or to run away—the sympathetic system causes divergent effects as many different
effector organs are activated together for a common purpose. More oxygen needs to be inhaled and delivered to
skeletal muscle. The respiratory, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal systems are all activated together.
Additionally, sweating keeps the excess heat that comes from muscle contraction from causing the body to
overheat. The digestive system shuts down so that blood is not absorbing nutrients when it should be delivering
oxygen to skeletal muscles. To coordinate all these responses, the connections in the sympathetic system diverge
590
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
from a limited region of the central nervous system (CNS) to a wide array of ganglia that project to the many effector
organs simultaneously. The complex set of structures that compose the output of the sympathetic system make it
possible for these disparate effectors to come together in a coordinated, systemic change.
The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system influences the various organ systems of the body through
connections emerging from the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord. It is referred to as the thoracolumbar
system to reflect this anatomical basis. A central neuron in the lateral horn of any of these spinal regions projects
to ganglia adjacent to the vertebral column through the ventral spinal roots. The majority of ganglia of the
sympathetic system belong to a network of sympathetic chain ganglia that runs alongside the vertebral column.
The ganglia appear as a series of clusters of neurons linked by axonal bridges. There are typically 23 ganglia in the
chain on either side of the spinal column. Three correspond to the cervical region, 12 are in the thoracic region, four
are in the lumbar region, and four correspond to the sacral region. The cervical and sacral levels are not connected
to the spinal cord directly through the spinal roots, but through ascending or descending connections through the
bridges within the chain.
A diagram that shows the connections of the sympathetic system is somewhat like a circuit diagram that shows the
electrical connections between different receptacles and devices. In Figure 15.2, the “circuits” of the sympathetic
system are intentionally simplified.
15.1 • Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
591
FIGURE 15.2
Connections of Sympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
Neurons from the lateral horn of the spinal
cord (preganglionic nerve fibers - solid lines)) project to the chain ganglia on either side of the vertebral column or to collateral
(prevertebral) ganglia that are anterior to the vertebral column in the abdominal cavity. Axons from these ganglionic neurons
(postganglionic nerve fibers - dotted lines) then project to target effectors throughout the body.
To continue with the analogy of the circuit diagram, there are three different types of “junctions” that operate within
the sympathetic system (Figure 15.3). The first type is most direct: the sympathetic nerve projects to the chain
ganglion at the same level as the target effector (the organ, tissue, or gland to be innervated). An example of this
type is spinal nerve T1 that synapses with the T1 chain ganglion to innervate the trachea. The fibers of this branch
592
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
are called white rami communicantes (singular = ramus communicans); they are myelinated and therefore referred
to as white (see Figure 15.3a). The axon from the central neuron (the preganglionic fiber shown as a solid line)
synapses with the ganglionic neuron (with the postganglionic fiber shown as a dashed line). This neuron then
projects to a target effector—in this case, the trachea—via gray rami communicantes, which are unmyelinated
axons.
In some cases, the target effectors are located superior or inferior to the spinal segment at which the preganglionic
fiber emerges. With respect to the “wiring” involved, the synapse with the ganglionic neuron occurs at chain ganglia
superior or inferior to the location of the central neuron. An example of this is spinal nerve T1 that innervates the
eye. The spinal nerve tracks up through the chain until it reaches the superior cervical ganglion, where it synapses
with the postganglionic neuron (see Figure 15.3b). The cervical ganglia are referred to as paravertebral ganglia,
given their location adjacent to prevertebral ganglia in the sympathetic chain.
Not all axons from the central neurons terminate in the chain ganglia. Additional branches from the ventral nerve
root continue through the chain and on to one of the collateral ganglia as the greater splanchnic nerve or lesser
splanchnic nerve. For example, the greater splanchnic nerve at the level of T5 synapses with a collateral ganglion
outside the chain before making the connection to the postganglionic nerves that innervate the stomach (see Figure
15.3c).
Collateral ganglia, also called prevertebral ganglia, are situated anterior to the vertebral column and receive
inputs from splanchnic nerves as well as central sympathetic neurons. They are associated with controlling organs
in the abdominal cavity, and are also considered part of the enteric nervous system. The three collateral ganglia are
the celiac ganglion, the superior mesenteric ganglion, and the inferior mesenteric ganglion (see Figure 15.2). The
word celiac is derived from the Latin word “coelom,” which refers to a body cavity (in this case, the abdominal
cavity), and the word mesenteric refers to the digestive system.
15.1 • Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
593
FIGURE 15.3
Sympathetic Connections and Chain Ganglia
The axon from a central sympathetic neuron in the spinal cord can project
to the periphery in a number of different ways. (a) The fiber can project out to the ganglion at the same level and synapse on a ganglionic
neuron. (b) A branch can project to more superior or inferior ganglion in the chain. (c) A branch can project through the white ramus
communicans, but not terminate on a ganglionic neuron in the chain. Instead, it projects through one of the splanchnic nerves to a
collateral ganglion or the adrenal medulla (not pictured).
An axon from the central neuron that projects to a sympathetic ganglion is referred to as a preganglionic fiber or
neuron, and represents the output from the CNS to the ganglion. Because the sympathetic ganglia are adjacent to
the vertebral column, preganglionic sympathetic fibers are relatively short, and they are myelinated. A
postganglionic fiber—the axon from a ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector—represents the output
of a ganglion that directly influences the organ. Compared with the preganglionic fibers, postganglionic sympathetic
fibers are long because of the relatively greater distance from the ganglion to the target effector. These fibers are
unmyelinated. (Note that the term “postganglionic neuron” may be used to describe the projection from a ganglion
to the target. The problem with that usage is that the cell body is in the ganglion, and only the fiber is postganglionic.
Typically, the term neuron applies to the entire cell.)
One type of preganglionic sympathetic fiber does not terminate in a ganglion. These are the axons from central
sympathetic neurons that project to the adrenal medulla, the interior portion of the adrenal gland. These axons are
594
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
still referred to as preganglionic fibers, but the target is not a ganglion. The adrenal medulla releases signaling
molecules into the bloodstream, rather than using axons to communicate with target structures. The cells in the
adrenal medulla that are contacted by the preganglionic fibers are called chromaffin cells. These cells are
neurosecretory cells that develop from the neural crest along with the sympathetic ganglia, reinforcing the idea that
the gland is, functionally, a sympathetic ganglion.
The projections of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system diverge widely, resulting in a broad
influence of the system throughout the body. As a response to a threat, the sympathetic system would increase
heart rate and breathing rate and cause blood flow to the skeletal muscle to increase and blood flow to the digestive
system to decrease. Sweat gland secretion should also increase as part of an integrated response. All of those
physiological changes are going to be required to occur together to run away from the hunting lioness, or the
modern equivalent. This divergence is seen in the branching patterns of preganglionic sympathetic neurons—a
single preganglionic sympathetic neuron may have 10–20 targets. An axon that leaves a central neuron of the lateral
horn in the thoracolumbar spinal cord will pass through the white ramus communicans and enter the sympathetic
chain, where it will branch toward a variety of targets. At the level of the spinal cord at which the preganglionic
sympathetic fiber exits the spinal cord, a branch will synapse on a neuron in the adjacent chain ganglion. Some
branches will extend up or down to a different level of the chain ganglia. Other branches will pass through the chain
ganglia and project through one of the splanchnic nerves to a collateral ganglion. Finally, some branches may project
through the splanchnic nerves to the adrenal medulla. All of these branches mean that one preganglionic neuron
can influence different regions of the sympathetic system very broadly, by acting on widely distributed organs.
Parasympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
The parasympathetic system can also be referred to as the craniosacral system (or outflow) because the
preganglionic neurons are located in nuclei of the brain stem and the lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord.
The connections, or “circuits,” of the parasympathetic division are similar to the general layout of the sympathetic
division with a few specific differences (Figure 15.4). The preganglionic fibers from the cranial region travel in cranial
nerves, whereas preganglionic fibers from the sacral region travel in spinal nerves. The targets of these fibers are
terminal ganglia, which are located near—or even within—the target effector. These ganglia are often referred to as
intramural ganglia when they are found within the walls of the target organ. The postganglionic fiber projects from
the terminal ganglia a short distance to the target effector, or to the specific target tissue within the organ.
Comparing the relative lengths of axons in the parasympathetic system, the preganglionic fibers are long and the
postganglionic fibers are short because the ganglia are close to—and sometimes within—the target effectors.
The cranial component of the parasympathetic system is based in particular nuclei of the brain stem. In the
midbrain, the Edinger–Westphal nucleus is part of the oculomotor complex, and axons from those neurons travel
with the fibers in the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III) that innervate the extraocular muscles. The preganglionic
parasympathetic fibers within cranial nerve III terminate in the ciliary ganglion, which is located in the posterior
orbit. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers then project to the smooth muscle of the iris to control pupillary
size. In the upper medulla, the salivatory nuclei contain neurons with axons that project through the facial and
glossopharyngeal nerves to ganglia that control salivary glands. Tear production is influenced by parasympathetic
fibers in the facial nerve, which activate a ganglion, and ultimately the lacrimal (tear) gland. Neurons in the dorsal
nucleus of the vagus nerve and the nucleus ambiguus project through the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) to the
terminal ganglia of the thoracic and abdominal cavities. Parasympathetic preganglionic fibers primarily influence the
heart, bronchi, and esophagus in the thoracic cavity and the stomach, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, and small
intestine of the abdominal cavity. The postganglionic fibers from the ganglia activated by the vagus nerve are often
incorporated into the structure of the organ, such as the mesenteric plexus of the digestive tract organs and the
intramural ganglia.
15.1 • Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
595
FIGURE 15.4
Connections of Parasympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
Neurons from brain-stem nuclei, or from
the lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord, project to terminal ganglia near or within the various organs of the body. Axons from these
ganglionic neurons then project the short distance to those target effectors.
Chemical Signaling in the Autonomic Nervous System
Where an autonomic neuron connects with a target, there is a synapse. The electrical signal of the action potential
596
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
causes the release of a signaling molecule, which will bind to receptor proteins on the target cell. Synapses of the
autonomic system are classified as either cholinergic, meaning that acetylcholine (ACh) is released, or adrenergic,
meaning that norepinephrine is released. The terms cholinergic and adrenergic refer not only to the signaling
molecule that is released but also to the class of receptors that each binds.
The cholinergic system includes two classes of receptor: the nicotinic receptor and the muscarinic receptor. Both
receptor types bind to ACh and cause changes in the target cell. The nicotinic receptor is a ligand-gated cation
channel and the muscarinic receptor is a G protein–coupled receptor. The receptors are named for, and
differentiated by, other molecules that bind to them. Whereas nicotine will bind to the nicotinic receptor, and
muscarine will bind to the muscarinic receptor, there is no cross-reactivity between the receptors. The situation is
similar to locks and keys. Imagine two locks—one for a classroom and the other for an office—that are opened by
two separate keys. The classroom key will not open the office door and the office key will not open the classroom
door. This is similar to the specificity of nicotine and muscarine for their receptors. However, a master key can open
multiple locks, such as a master key for the Biology Department that opens both the classroom and the office doors.
This is similar to ACh that binds to both types of receptors. The molecules that define these receptors are not
crucial—they are simply tools for researchers to use in the laboratory. These molecules are exogenous, meaning
that they are made outside of the human body, so a researcher can use them without any confounding endogenous
results (results caused by the molecules produced in the body).
The adrenergic system also has two types of receptors, named the alpha (α)-adrenergic receptor and beta (β)-
adrenergic receptor. Unlike cholinergic receptors, these receptor types are not classified by which drugs can bind
to them. All of them are G protein–coupled receptors. There are two types of α-adrenergic receptors, termed α1, and
α2, and there are three types of β-adrenergic receptors, termed β1, β2 and β3. An additional aspect of the adrenergic
system is that there is a second signaling molecule called epinephrine. The chemical difference between
norepinephrine and epinephrine is the addition of a methyl group (CH3) in epinephrine. The prefix “nor-” actually
refers to this chemical difference, in which a methyl group is missing.
The term adrenergic should remind you of the word adrenaline, which is associated with the fight-or-flight response
described at the beginning of the chapter. Adrenaline and epinephrine are two names for the same molecule. The
adrenal gland (in Latin, ad- = “on top of”; renal = “kidney”) secretes adrenaline. The ending “-ine” refers to the
chemical being derived, or extracted, from the adrenal gland. A similar construction from Greek instead of Latin
results in the word epinephrine (epi- = “above”; nephr- = “kidney”). In scientific usage, epinephrine is preferred in
the United States, whereas adrenaline is preferred in Great Britain, because “adrenalin” was once a registered,
proprietary drug name in the United States. Though the drug is no longer sold, the convention of referring to this
molecule by the two different names persists. Similarly, norepinephrine and noradrenaline are two names for the
same molecule.
Having understood the cholinergic and adrenergic systems, their role in the autonomic system is relatively simple to
understand. All preganglionic fibers, both sympathetic and parasympathetic, release ACh. All ganglionic
neurons—the targets of these preganglionic fibers—have nicotinic receptors in their cell membranes. The nicotinic
receptor is a ligand-gated cation channel that results in depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane. The
postganglionic parasympathetic fibers also release ACh, but the receptors on their targets are muscarinic receptors,
which are G protein–coupled receptors and do not exclusively cause depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane.
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, except for fibers that project to sweat glands and to
blood vessels associated with skeletal muscles, which release ACh (Table 15.1).
15.1 • Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
597
Autonomic System Signaling Molecules
Sympathetic
Parasympathetic
Preganglionic
Acetylcholine → nicotinic receptor
Acetylcholine →
nicotinic receptor
Postganglionic
Norepinephrine → α- or β-adrenergic receptors
Acetylcholine → muscarinic receptor (associated with sweat glands and
the blood vessels associated with skeletal muscles only
Acetylcholine →
muscarinic
receptor
TABLE 15.1
Signaling molecules can belong to two broad groups. Neurotransmitters are released at synapses, whereas
hormones are released into the bloodstream. These are simplistic definitions, but they can help to clarify this point.
Acetylcholine can be considered a neurotransmitter because it is released by axons at synapses. The adrenergic
system, however, presents a challenge. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, which can be
considered a neurotransmitter. But the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine and norepinephrine into circulation, so
they should be considered hormones.
What are referred to here as synapses may not fit the strictest definition of synapse. Some sources will refer to the
connection between a postganglionic fiber and a target effector as neuroeffector junctions; neurotransmitters, as
defined above, would be called neuromodulators. The structure of postganglionic connections are not the typical
synaptic end bulb that is found at the neuromuscular junction, but rather are chains of swellings along the length of
a postganglionic fiber called a varicosity (Figure 15.5).
FIGURE 15.5
Autonomic Varicosities
The connection between autonomic fibers and target effectors is not the same as the typical
synapse, such as the neuromuscular junction. Instead of a synaptic end bulb, a neurotransmitter is released from swellings along the length
of a fiber that makes an extended network of connections in the target effector.
Everyday Connection
Fight or Flight? What About Fright and Freeze?
The original usage of the epithet “fight or flight” comes from a scientist named Walter Cannon who worked at
Harvard in 1915. The concept of homeostasis and the functioning of the sympathetic system had been
introduced in France in the previous century. Cannon expanded the idea, and introduced the idea that an animal
responds to a threat by preparing to stand and fight or run away. The nature of this response was thoroughly
explained in a book on the physiology of pain, hunger, fear, and rage.
When students learn about the sympathetic system and the fight-or-flight response, they often stop and wonder
about other responses. If you were faced with a lioness running toward you as pictured at the beginning of this
598
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/nervsystem1) to learn more about the nervous system. As described in this
video, the nervous system has a way to deal with threats and stress that is separate from the conscious control of
the somatic nervous system. The system comes from a time when threats were about survival, but in the modern
age, these responses become part of stress and anxiety. This video describes how the autonomic system is only part
of the response to threats, or stressors. What other organ system gets involved, and what part of the brain
coordinates the two systems for the entire response, including epinephrine (adrenaline) and cortisol?
15.2 Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare the structure of somatic and autonomic reflex arcs
•
Explain the differences in sympathetic and parasympathetic reflexes
•
Differentiate between short and long reflexes
•
Determine the effect of the autonomic nervous system on the regulation of the various organ systems on the
basis of the signaling molecules involved
•
Describe the effects of drugs that affect autonomic function
The autonomic nervous system regulates organ systems through circuits that resemble the reflexes described in the
somatic nervous system. The main difference between the somatic and autonomic systems is in what target tissues
are effectors. Somatic responses are solely based on skeletal muscle contraction. The autonomic system, however,
targets cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as glandular tissue. Whereas the basic circuit is a reflex arc, there are
differences in the structure of those reflexes for the somatic and autonomic systems.
The Structure of Reflexes
One difference between a somatic reflex, such as the withdrawal reflex, and a visceral reflex, which is an
autonomic reflex, is in the efferent branch. The output of a somatic reflex is the lower motor neuron in the ventral
horn of the spinal cord that projects directly to a skeletal muscle to cause its contraction. The output of a visceral
reflex is a two-step pathway starting with the preganglionic fiber emerging from a lateral horn neuron in the spinal
cord, or a cranial nucleus neuron in the brain stem, to a ganglion—followed by the postganglionic fiber projecting to a
target effector. The other part of a reflex, the afferent branch, is often the same between the two systems. Sensory
neurons receiving input from the periphery—with cell bodies in the sensory ganglia, either of a cranial nerve or a
dorsal root ganglion adjacent to the spinal cord—project into the CNS to initiate the reflex (Figure 15.6). The Latin
root “effere” means “to carry.” Adding the prefix “ef-” suggests the meaning “to carry away,” whereas adding the
prefix “af-” suggests “to carry toward or inward.”
chapter, would you run or would you stand your ground? Some people would say that they would freeze and not
know what to do. So isn’t there really more to what the autonomic system does than fight, flight, rest, or digest.
What about fear and paralysis in the face of a threat?
The common epithet of “fight or flight” is being enlarged to be “fight, flight, or fright” or even “fight, flight, fright,
or freeze.” Cannon’s original contribution was a catchy phrase to express some of what the nervous system does
in response to a threat, but it is incomplete. The sympathetic system is responsible for the physiological
responses to emotional states. The name “sympathetic” can be said to mean that (sym- = “together”; -pathos =
“pain,” “suffering,” or “emotion”).
15.2 • Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
599
FIGURE 15.6
Comparison of Somatic and Visceral Reflexes
The afferent inputs to somatic and visceral reflexes are essentially the
same, whereas the efferent branches are different. Somatic reflexes, for instance, involve a direct connection from the ventral horn of the
spinal cord to the skeletal muscle. Visceral reflexes involve a projection from the central neuron to a ganglion, followed by a second
projection from the ganglion to the target effector.
Afferent Branch
The afferent branch of a reflex arc does differ between somatic and visceral reflexes in some instances. Many of the
inputs to visceral reflexes are from special or somatic senses, but particular senses are associated with the viscera
that are not part of the conscious perception of the environment through the somatic nervous system. For example,
there is a specific type of mechanoreceptor, called a baroreceptor, in the walls of the aorta and carotid sinuses that
senses the stretch of those organs when blood volume or pressure increases. You do not have a conscious
perception of having high blood pressure, but that is an important afferent branch of the cardiovascular and,
particularly, vasomotor reflexes. The sensory neuron is essentially the same as any other general sensory neuron.
The baroreceptor apparatus is part of the ending of a unipolar neuron that has a cell body in a sensory ganglion. The
600
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
baroreceptors from the carotid arteries have axons in the glossopharyngeal nerve, and those from the aorta have
axons in the vagus nerve.
Though visceral senses are not primarily a part of conscious perception, those sensations sometimes make it to
conscious awareness. If a visceral sense is strong enough, it will be perceived. The sensory homunculus—the
representation of the body in the primary somatosensory cortex—only has a small region allotted for the perception
of internal stimuli. If you swallow a large bolus of food, for instance, you will probably feel the lump of that food as it
pushes through your esophagus, or even if your stomach is distended after a large meal. If you inhale especially cold
air, you can feel it as it enters your larynx and trachea. These sensations are not the same as feeling high blood
pressure or blood sugar levels.
When particularly strong visceral sensations rise to the level of conscious perception, the sensations are often felt in
unexpected places. For example, strong visceral sensations of the heart will be felt as pain in the left shoulder and
left arm. This irregular pattern of projection of conscious perception of visceral sensations is called referred pain.
Depending on the organ system affected, the referred pain will project to different areas of the body (Figure 15.7).
The location of referred pain is not random, but a definitive explanation of the mechanism has not been established.
The most broadly accepted theory for this phenomenon is that the visceral sensory fibers enter into the same level
of the spinal cord as the somatosensory fibers of the referred pain location. By this explanation, the visceral sensory
fibers from the mediastinal region, where the heart is located, would enter the spinal cord at the same level as the
spinal nerves from the shoulder and arm, so the brain misinterprets the sensations from the mediastinal region as
being from the axillary and brachial regions. Projections from the medial and inferior divisions of the cervical ganglia
do enter the spinal cord at the middle to lower cervical levels, which is where the somatosensory fibers enter.
FIGURE 15.7
Referred Pain Chart
Conscious perception of visceral sensations map to specific regions of the body, as shown in this
chart. Some sensations are felt locally, whereas others are perceived as affecting areas that are quite distant from the involved organ.
Disorders of the...
Nervous System: Kehr’s Sign
Kehr’s sign is the presentation of pain in the left shoulder, chest, and neck regions following rupture of the
spleen. The spleen is in the upper-left abdominopelvic quadrant, but the pain is more in the shoulder and neck.
How can this be? The sympathetic fibers connected to the spleen are from the celiac ganglion, which would be
15.2 • Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
601
Efferent Branch
The efferent branch of the visceral reflex arc begins with the projection from the central neuron along the
preganglionic fiber. This fiber then makes a synapse on the ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector.
The effector organs that are the targets of the autonomic system range from the iris and ciliary body of the eye to the
urinary bladder and reproductive organs. The thoracolumbar output, through the various sympathetic ganglia,
reaches all of these organs. The cranial component of the parasympathetic system projects from the eye to part of
the intestines. The sacral component picks up with the majority of the large intestine and the pelvic organs of the
urinary and reproductive systems.
Short and Long Reflexes
Somatic reflexes involve sensory neurons that connect sensory receptors to the CNS and motor neurons that project
back out to the skeletal muscles. Visceral reflexes that involve the thoracolumbar or craniosacral systems share
similar connections. However, there are reflexes that do not need to involve any CNS components. A long reflex has
afferent branches that enter the spinal cord or brain and involve the efferent branches, as previously explained. A
short reflex is completely peripheral and only involves the local integration of sensory input with motor output
(Figure 15.8).
from the mid-thoracic to lower thoracic region whereas parasympathetic fibers are found in the vagus nerve,
which connects in the medulla of the brain stem. However, the neck and shoulder would connect to the spinal
cord at the mid-cervical level of the spinal cord. These connections do not fit with the expected correspondence
of visceral and somatosensory fibers entering at the same level of the spinal cord.
The incorrect assumption would be that the visceral sensations are coming from the spleen directly. In fact, the
visceral fibers are coming from the diaphragm. The nerve connecting to the diaphragm takes a special route. The
phrenic nerve is connected to the spinal cord at cervical levels 3 to 5. The motor fibers that make up this nerve
are responsible for the muscle contractions that drive ventilation. These fibers have left the spinal cord to enter
the phrenic nerve, meaning that spinal cord damage below the mid-cervical level is not fatal by making
ventilation impossible. Therefore, the visceral fibers from the diaphragm enter the spinal cord at the same level
as the somatosensory fibers from the neck and shoulder.
The diaphragm plays a role in Kehr’s sign because the spleen is just inferior to the diaphragm in the upper-left
quadrant of the abdominopelvic cavity. When the spleen ruptures, blood spills into this region. The accumulating
hemorrhage then puts pressure on the diaphragm. The visceral sensation is actually in the diaphragm, so the
referred pain is in a region of the body that corresponds to the diaphragm, not the spleen.
602
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 15.8
Short and Long Reflexes
Sensory input can stimulate either a short or a long reflex. A sensory neuron can project to the
CNS or to an autonomic ganglion. The short reflex involves the direct stimulation of a postganglionic fiber by the sensory neuron, whereas
the long reflex involves integration in the spinal cord or brain.
The difference between short and long reflexes is in the involvement of the CNS. Somatic reflexes always involve the
CNS, even in a monosynaptic reflex in which the sensory neuron directly activates the motor neuron. That synapse is
in the spinal cord or brain stem, so it has to involve the CNS. However, in the autonomic system there is the
possibility that the CNS is not involved. Because the efferent branch of a visceral reflex involves two neurons—the
central neuron and the ganglionic neuron—a “short circuit” can be possible. If a sensory neuron projects directly to
the ganglionic neuron and causes it to activate the effector target, then the CNS is not involved.
A division of the nervous system that is related to the autonomic nervous system is the enteric nervous system. The
word enteric refers to the digestive organs, so this represents the nervous tissue that is part of the digestive system.
There are a few myenteric plexuses in which the nervous tissue in the wall of the digestive tract organs can directly
influence digestive function. If stretch receptors in the stomach are activated by the filling and distension of the
stomach, a short reflex will directly activate the smooth muscle fibers of the stomach wall to increase motility to
digest the excessive food in the stomach. No CNS involvement is needed because the stretch receptor is directly
activating a neuron in the wall of the stomach that causes the smooth muscle to contract. That neuron, connected to
the smooth muscle, is a postganglionic parasympathetic neuron that can be controlled by a fiber found in the vagus
nerve.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/strokespell) to learn about a teenager who experiences a series of spells that
suggest a stroke. He undergoes endless tests and seeks input from multiple doctors. In the end, one expert, one
15.2 • Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
603
question, and a simple blood pressure cuff answers the question. Why would the heart have to beat faster when the
teenager changes his body position from lying down to sitting, and then to standing?
Balance in Competing Autonomic Reflex Arcs
The autonomic nervous system is important for homeostasis because its two divisions compete at the target
effector. The balance of homeostasis is attributable to the competing inputs from the sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions (dual innervation). At the level of the target effector, the signal of which system is sending
the message is strictly chemical. A signaling molecule binds to a receptor that causes changes in the target cell,
which in turn causes the tissue or organ to respond to the changing conditions of the body.
Competing Neurotransmitters
The postganglionic fibers of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions both release neurotransmitters that
bind to receptors on their targets. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, with a minor exception,
whereas postganglionic parasympathetic fibers release ACh. For any given target, the difference in which division of
the autonomic nervous system is exerting control is just in what chemical binds to its receptors. The target cells will
have adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. If norepinephrine is released, it will bind to the adrenergic receptors
present on the target cell, and if ACh is released, it will bind to the muscarinic receptors on the target cell.
In the sympathetic system, there are exceptions to this pattern of dual innervation. The postganglionic sympathetic
fibers that contact the blood vessels within skeletal muscle and that contact sweat glands do not release
norepinephrine, they release ACh. This does not create any problem because there is no parasympathetic input to
the sweat glands. Sweat glands have muscarinic receptors and produce and secrete sweat in response to the
presence of ACh.
At most of the other targets of the autonomic system, the effector response is based on which neurotransmitter is
released and what receptor is present. For example, regions of the heart that establish heart rate are contacted by
postganglionic fibers from both systems. If norepinephrine is released onto those cells, it binds to an adrenergic
receptor that causes the cells to depolarize faster, and the heart rate increases. If ACh is released onto those cells, it
binds to a muscarinic receptor that causes the cells to hyperpolarize so that they cannot reach threshold as easily,
and the heart rate slows. Without this parasympathetic input, the heart would work at a rate of approximately 100
beats per minute (bpm). The sympathetic system speeds that up, as it would during exercise, to 120–140 bpm, for
example. The parasympathetic system slows it down to the resting heart rate of 60–80 bpm.
Another example is in the control of pupillary size (Figure 15.9). The afferent branch responds to light hitting the
retina. Photoreceptors are activated, and the signal is transferred to the retinal ganglion cells that send an action
potential along the optic nerve into the diencephalon. If light levels are low, the sympathetic system sends a signal
out through the upper thoracic spinal cord to the superior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic chain. The
postganglionic fiber then projects to the iris, where it releases norepinephrine onto the radial fibers of the iris (a
smooth muscle). When those fibers contract, the pupil dilates—increasing the amount of light hitting the retina. If
light levels are too high, the parasympathetic system sends a signal out from the Edinger–Westphal nucleus through
the oculomotor nerve. This fiber synapses in the ciliary ganglion in the posterior orbit. The postganglionic fiber then
projects to the iris, where it releases ACh onto the circular fibers of the iris—another smooth muscle. When those
fibers contract, the pupil constricts to limit the amount of light hitting the retina.
604
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 15.9
Autonomic Control of Pupillary Size
Activation of the pupillary reflex comes from the amount of light activating the
retinal ganglion cells, as sent along the optic nerve. The output of the sympathetic system projects through the superior cervical ganglion,
whereas the parasympathetic system originates out of the midbrain and projects through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion,
which then projects to the iris. The postganglionic fibers of either division release neurotransmitters onto the smooth muscles of the iris to
cause changes in the pupillary size. Norepinephrine results in dilation and ACh results in constriction.
In this example, the autonomic system is controlling how much light hits the retina. It is a homeostatic reflex
mechanism that keeps the activation of photoreceptors within certain limits. In the context of avoiding a threat like
the lioness on the savannah, the sympathetic response for fight or flight will increase pupillary diameter so that
more light hits the retina and more visual information is available for running away. Likewise, the parasympathetic
response of rest reduces the amount of light reaching the retina, allowing the photoreceptors to cycle through
bleaching and be regenerated for further visual perception; this is what the homeostatic process is attempting to
maintain.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/pupillary) to learn about the pupillary reflexes. The pupillary light reflex
involves sensory input through the optic nerve and motor response through the oculomotor nerve to the ciliary
ganglion, which projects to the circular fibers of the iris. As shown in this short animation, pupils will constrict to
limit the amount of light falling on the retina under bright lighting conditions. What constitutes the afferent and
15.2 • Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
605
efferent branches of the competing reflex (dilation)?
Autonomic Tone
Organ systems are balanced between the input from the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. When
something upsets that balance, the homeostatic mechanisms strive to return it to its regular state. For each organ
system, there may be more of a sympathetic or parasympathetic tendency to the resting state, which is known as
the autonomic tone of the system. For example, the heart rate was described above. Because the resting heart rate
is the result of the parasympathetic system slowing the heart down from its intrinsic rate of 100 bpm, the heart can
be said to be in parasympathetic tone.
In a similar fashion, another aspect of the cardiovascular system is primarily under sympathetic control. Blood
pressure is partially determined by the contraction of smooth muscle in the walls of blood vessels. These tissues
have adrenergic receptors that respond to the release of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic fibers by
constricting and increasing blood pressure. The hormones released from the adrenal medulla—epinephrine and
norepinephrine—will also bind to these receptors. Those hormones travel through the bloodstream where they can
easily interact with the receptors in the vessel walls. The parasympathetic system has no significant input to the
systemic blood vessels, so the sympathetic system determines their tone.
There are a limited number of blood vessels that respond to sympathetic input in a different fashion. Blood vessels
in skeletal muscle, particularly those in the lower limbs, are more likely to dilate. It does not have an overall effect
on blood pressure to alter the tone of the vessels, but rather allows for blood flow to increase for those skeletal
muscles that will be active in the fight-or-flight response. The blood vessels that have a parasympathetic projection
are limited to those in the erectile tissue of the reproductive organs. Acetylcholine released by these postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers cause the vessels to dilate, leading to the engorgement of the erectile tissue.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Orthostatic Hypotension
Have you ever stood up quickly and felt dizzy for a moment? This is because, for one reason or another, blood is not
getting to your brain so it is briefly deprived of oxygen. When you change position from sitting or lying down to
standing, your cardiovascular system has to adjust for a new challenge, keeping blood pumping up into the head
while gravity is pulling more and more blood down into the legs.
The reason for this is a sympathetic reflex that maintains the output of the heart in response to postural change.
When a person stands up, proprioceptors indicate that the body is changing position. A signal goes to the CNS,
which then sends a signal to the upper thoracic spinal cord neurons of the sympathetic division. The sympathetic
system then causes the heart to beat faster and the blood vessels to constrict. Both changes will make it possible
for the cardiovascular system to maintain the rate of blood delivery to the brain. Blood is being pumped superiorly
through the internal branch of the carotid arteries into the brain, against the force of gravity. Gravity is not increasing
while standing, but blood is more likely to flow down into the legs as they are extended for standing. This
sympathetic reflex keeps the brain well oxygenated so that cognitive and other neural processes are not interrupted.
Sometimes this does not work properly. If the sympathetic system cannot increase cardiac output, then blood
pressure into the brain will decrease, and a brief neurological loss can be felt. This can be brief, as a slight
“wooziness” when standing up too quickly, or a loss of balance and neurological impairment for a period of time.
The name for this is orthostatic hypotension, which means that blood pressure goes below the homeostatic set
point when standing. It can be the result of standing up faster than the reflex can occur, which may be referred to as
a benign “head rush,” or it may be the result of an underlying cause.
There are two basic reasons that orthostatic hypotension can occur. First, blood volume is too low and the
sympathetic reflex is not effective. This hypovolemia may be the result of dehydration or medications that affect
fluid balance, such as diuretics or vasodilators. Both of these medications are meant to lower blood pressure, which
may be necessary in the case of systemic hypertension, and regulation of the medications may alleviate the
problem. Sometimes increasing fluid intake or water retention through salt intake can improve the situation.
606
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
The second underlying cause of orthostatic hypotension is autonomic failure. There are several disorders that result
in compromised sympathetic functions. The disorders range from diabetes to multiple system atrophy (a loss of
control over many systems in the body), and addressing the underlying condition can improve the hypotension. For
example, with diabetes, peripheral nerve damage can occur, which would affect the postganglionic sympathetic
fibers. Getting blood glucose levels under control can improve neurological deficits associated with diabetes.
15.3 Central Control
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the role of higher centers of the brain in autonomic regulation
•
Explain the connection of the hypothalamus to homeostasis
•
Describe the regions of the CNS that link the autonomic system with emotion
•
Describe the pathways important to descending control of the autonomic system
The pupillary light reflex (Figure 15.10) begins when light hits the retina and causes a signal to travel along the optic
nerve. This is visual sensation, because the afferent branch of this reflex is simply sharing the special sense
pathway. Bright light hitting the retina leads to the parasympathetic response, through the oculomotor nerve,
followed by the postganglionic fiber from the ciliary ganglion, which stimulates the circular fibers of the iris to
contract and constrict the pupil. When light hits the retina in one eye, both pupils contract. When that light is
removed, both pupils dilate again back to the resting position. When the stimulus is unilateral (presented to only one
eye), the response is bilateral (both eyes). The same is not true for somatic reflexes. If you touch a hot radiator, you
only pull that arm back, not both. Central control of autonomic reflexes is different than for somatic reflexes. The
hypothalamus, along with other CNS locations, controls the autonomic system.
FIGURE 15.10
Pupillary Reflex Pathways
The pupil is under competing autonomic control in response to light levels hitting the retina.
The sympathetic system will dilate the pupil when the retina is not receiving enough light, and the parasympathetic system will constrict
the pupil when too much light hits the retina.
Forebrain Structures
Autonomic control is based on the visceral reflexes, composed of the afferent and efferent branches. These
homeostatic mechanisms are based on the balance between the two divisions of the autonomic system, which
results in tone for various organs that is based on the predominant input from the sympathetic or parasympathetic
systems. Coordinating that balance requires integration that begins with forebrain structures like the hypothalamus
and continues into the brain stem and spinal cord.
15.3 • Central Control
607
The Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is the control center for many homeostatic mechanisms. It regulates both autonomic function
and endocrine function. The roles it plays in the pupillary reflexes demonstrates the importance of this control
center. The optic nerve projects primarily to the thalamus, which is the necessary relay to the occipital cortex for
conscious visual perception. Another projection of the optic nerve, however, goes to the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus then uses this visual system input to drive the pupillary reflexes. If the retina is activated by high
levels of light, the hypothalamus stimulates the parasympathetic response. If the optic nerve message shows that
low levels of light are falling on the retina, the hypothalamus activates the sympathetic response. Output from the
hypothalamus follows two main tracts, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus and the medial forebrain bundle (Figure
15.11). Along these two tracts, the hypothalamus can influence the Edinger–Westphal nucleus of the oculomotor
complex or the lateral horns of the thoracic spinal cord.
FIGURE 15.11
Fiber Tracts of the Central Autonomic System
The hypothalamus is the source of most of the central control of
autonomic function. It receives input from cerebral structures and projects to brain stem and spinal cord structures to regulate the balance
of sympathetic and parasympathetic input to the organ systems of the body. The main pathways for this are the medial forebrain bundle
and the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus.
These two tracts connect the hypothalamus with the major parasympathetic nuclei in the brain stem and the
preganglionic (central) neurons of the thoracolumbar spinal cord. The hypothalamus also receives input from other
areas of the forebrain through the medial forebrain bundle. The olfactory cortex, the septal nuclei of the basal
forebrain, and the amygdala project into the hypothalamus through the medial forebrain bundle. These forebrain
structures inform the hypothalamus about the state of the nervous system and can influence the regulatory
processes of homeostasis. A good example of this is found in the amygdala, which is found beneath the cerebral
cortex of the temporal lobe and plays a role in our ability to remember and feel emotions.
The Amygdala
The amygdala is a group of nuclei in the medial region of the temporal lobe that is part of the limbic lobe (Figure
15.12). The limbic lobe includes structures that are involved in emotional responses, as well as structures that
contribute to memory function. The limbic lobe has strong connections with the hypothalamus and influences the
608
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
state of its activity on the basis of emotional state. For example, when you are anxious or scared, the amygdala will
send signals to the hypothalamus along the medial forebrain bundle that will stimulate the sympathetic fight-or-
flight response. The hypothalamus will also stimulate the release of stress hormones through its control of the
endocrine system in response to amygdala input.
FIGURE 15.12
The Limbic Lobe
Structures arranged around the edge of the cerebrum constitute the limbic lobe, which includes the
amygdala, hippocampus, and cingulate gyrus, and connects to the hypothalamus.
The Medulla
The medulla contains nuclei referred to as the cardiovascular center, which controls the smooth and cardiac
muscle of the cardiovascular system through autonomic connections. When the homeostasis of the cardiovascular
system shifts, such as when blood pressure changes, the coordination of the autonomic system can be
accomplished within this region. Furthermore, when descending inputs from the hypothalamus stimulate this area,
the sympathetic system can increase activity in the cardiovascular system, such as in response to anxiety or stress.
The preganglionic sympathetic fibers that are responsible for increasing heart rate are referred to as the cardiac
accelerator nerves, whereas the preganglionic sympathetic fibers responsible for constricting blood vessels
compose the vasomotor nerves.
Several brain stem nuclei are important for the visceral control of major organ systems. One brain stem nucleus
involved in cardiovascular function is the solitary nucleus. It receives sensory input about blood pressure and
cardiac function from the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, and its output will activate sympathetic stimulation of
the heart or blood vessels through the upper thoracic lateral horn. Another brain stem nucleus important for visceral
control is the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, which is the motor nucleus for the parasympathetic functions
ascribed to the vagus nerve, including decreasing the heart rate, relaxing bronchial tubes in the lungs, and activating
digestive function through the enteric nervous system. The nucleus ambiguus, which is named for its ambiguous
histology, also contributes to the parasympathetic output of the vagus nerve and targets muscles in the pharynx and
larynx for swallowing and speech, as well as contributing to the parasympathetic tone of the heart along with the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.
Everyday Connection
Exercise and the Autonomic System
In addition to its association with the fight-or-flight response and rest-and-digest functions, the autonomic
system is responsible for certain everyday functions. For example, it comes into play when homeostatic
mechanisms dynamically change, such as the physiological changes that accompany exercise. Getting on the
treadmill and putting in a good workout will cause the heart rate to increase, breathing to be stronger and
15.3 • Central Control
609
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/emotions) to learn about physical responses to emotion. The autonomic
system, which is important for regulating the homeostasis of the organ systems, is also responsible for our
physiological responses to emotions such as fear. The video summarizes the extent of the body’s reactions and
describes several effects of the autonomic system in response to fear. On the basis of what you have already studied
about autonomic function, which effect would you expect to be associated with parasympathetic, rather than
sympathetic, activity?
15.4 Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the classes of pharmaceuticals that interact with the autonomic nervous system
•
Differentiate between cholinergic and adrenergic compounds
•
Differentiate between sympathomimetic and sympatholytic drugs
•
Relate the consequences of nicotine abuse with respect to autonomic control of the cardiovascular system
An important way to understand the effects of native neurochemicals in the autonomic system is in considering the
effects of pharmaceutical drugs. This can be considered in terms of how drugs change autonomic function. These
effects will primarily be based on how drugs act at the receptors of the autonomic system neurochemistry. The
signaling molecules of the nervous system interact with proteins in the cell membranes of various target cells. In
fact, no effect can be attributed to just the signaling molecules themselves without considering the receptors. A
chemical that the body produces to interact with those receptors is called an endogenous chemical, whereas a
chemical introduced to the system from outside is an exogenous chemical. Exogenous chemicals may be of a
natural origin, such as a plant extract, or they may be synthetically produced in a pharmaceutical laboratory.
Broad Autonomic Effects
One important drug that affects the autonomic system broadly is not a pharmaceutical therapeutic agent associated
with the system. This drug is nicotine. The effects of nicotine on the autonomic nervous system are important in
considering the role smoking can play in health.
All ganglionic neurons of the autonomic system, in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia, are activated by
ACh released from preganglionic fibers. The ACh receptors on these neurons are of the nicotinic type, meaning that
they are ligand-gated ion channels. When the neurotransmitter released from the preganglionic fiber binds to the
receptor protein, a channel opens to allow positive ions to cross the cell membrane. The result is depolarization of
the ganglia. Nicotine acts as an ACh analog at these synapses, so when someone takes in the drug, it binds to these
ACh receptors and activates the ganglionic neurons, causing them to depolarize.
Ganglia of both divisions are activated equally by the drug. For many target organs in the body, this results in no net
change. The competing inputs to the system cancel each other out and nothing significant happens. For example,
the sympathetic system will cause sphincters in the digestive tract to contract, limiting digestive propulsion, but the
deeper, sweat glands to activate, and the digestive system to suspend activity. These are the same physiological
changes associated with the fight-or-flight response, but there is nothing chasing you on that treadmill.
This is not a simple homeostatic mechanism at work because “maintaining the internal environment” would
mean getting all those changes back to their set points. Instead, the sympathetic system has become active
during exercise so that your body can cope with what is happening. A homeostatic mechanism is dealing with
the conscious decision to push the body away from a resting state. The heart, actually, is moving away from its
homeostatic set point. Without any input from the autonomic system, the heart would beat at approximately
100 bpm, and the parasympathetic system slows that down to the resting rate of approximately 70 bpm. But in
the middle of a good workout, you should see your heart rate at 120–140 bpm. You could say that the body is
stressed because of what you are doing to it. Homeostatic mechanisms are trying to keep blood pH in the
normal range, or to keep body temperature under control, but those are in response to the choice to exercise.
610
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
parasympathetic system will cause the contraction of other muscles in the digestive tract, which will try to push the
contents of the digestive system along. The end result is that the food does not really move along and the digestive
system has not appreciably changed.
The system in which this can be problematic is in the cardiovascular system, which is why smoking is a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. First, there is no significant parasympathetic regulation of blood pressure. Only a limited
number of blood vessels are affected by parasympathetic input, so nicotine will preferentially cause the vascular
tone to become more sympathetic, which means blood pressure will be increased. Second, the autonomic control of
the heart is special. Unlike skeletal or smooth muscles, cardiac muscle is intrinsically active, meaning that it
generates its own action potentials. The autonomic system does not cause the heart to beat, it just speeds it up
(sympathetic) or slows it down (parasympathetic). The mechanisms for this are not mutually exclusive, so the heart
receives conflicting signals, and the rhythm of the heart can be affected (Figure 15.13).
FIGURE 15.13
Autonomic Connections to Heart and Blood Vessels
The nicotinic receptor is found on all autonomic ganglia, but the
cardiovascular connections are particular, and do not conform to the usual competitive projections that would just cancel each other out
when stimulated by nicotine. The opposing signals to the heart would both depolarize and hyperpolarize the heart cells that establish the
rhythm of the heartbeat, likely causing arrhythmia. Only the sympathetic system governs systemic blood pressure so nicotine would cause
an increase.
Sympathetic Effect
The neurochemistry of the sympathetic system is based on the adrenergic system. Norepinephrine and epinephrine
influence target effectors by binding to the α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors. Drugs that affect the
sympathetic system affect these chemical systems. The drugs can be classified by whether they enhance the
functions of the sympathetic system or interrupt those functions. A drug that enhances adrenergic function is known
as a sympathomimetic drug, whereas a drug that interrupts adrenergic function is a sympatholytic drug.
Sympathomimetic Drugs
When the sympathetic system is not functioning correctly or the body is in a state of homeostatic imbalance, these
drugs act at postganglionic terminals and synapses in the sympathetic efferent pathway. These drugs either bind to
15.4 • Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
611
particular adrenergic receptors and mimic norepinephrine at the synapses between sympathetic postganglionic
fibers and their targets, or they increase the production and release of norepinephrine from postganglionic fibers.
Also, to increase the effectiveness of adrenergic chemicals released from the fibers, some of these drugs may block
the removal or reuptake of the neurotransmitter from the synapse.
A common sympathomimetic drug is phenylephrine, which is a common component of decongestants. It can also be
used to dilate the pupil and to raise blood pressure. Phenylephrine is known as an α1-adrenergic agonist, meaning
that it binds to a specific adrenergic receptor, stimulating a response. In this role, phenylephrine will bind to the
adrenergic receptors in bronchioles of the lungs and cause them to dilate. By opening these structures, accumulated
mucus can be cleared out of the lower respiratory tract. Phenylephrine is often paired with other pharmaceuticals,
such as analgesics, as in the “sinus” version of many over-the-counter drugs, such as Tylenol Sinus® or Excedrin
Sinus®, or in expectorants for chest congestion such as in Robitussin CF®.
A related molecule, called pseudoephedrine, was much more commonly used in these applications than was
phenylephrine, until the molecule became useful in the illicit production of amphetamines. Phenylephrine is not as
effective as a drug because it can be partially broken down in the digestive tract before it is ever absorbed. Like the
adrenergic agents, phenylephrine is effective in dilating the pupil, known as mydriasis (Figure 15.14).
Phenylephrine is used during an eye exam in an ophthalmologist’s or optometrist’s office for this purpose. It can
also be used to increase blood pressure in situations in which cardiac function is compromised, such as under
anesthesia or during septic shock.
FIGURE 15.14
Mydriasis
The sympathetic system causes pupillary dilation when norepinephrine binds to an adrenergic receptor in the
radial fibers of the iris smooth muscle. Phenylephrine mimics this action by binding to the same receptor when drops are applied onto the
surface of the eye in a doctor’s office. (credit: Corey Theiss / Vulegenda/Wikimedia Commons)
Other drugs that enhance adrenergic function are not associated with therapeutic uses, but affect the functions of
the sympathetic system in a similar fashion. Cocaine primarily interferes with the uptake of dopamine at the synapse
and can also increase adrenergic function. Caffeine is an antagonist to a different neurotransmitter receptor, called
the adenosine receptor. Adenosine will suppress adrenergic activity, specifically the release of norepinephrine at
synapses, so caffeine indirectly increases adrenergic activity. There is some evidence that caffeine can aid in the
therapeutic use of drugs, perhaps by potentiating (increasing) sympathetic function, as is suggested by the inclusion
of caffeine in over-the-counter analgesics such as Excedrin®.
Sympatholytic Drugs
Drugs that interfere with sympathetic function are referred to as sympatholytic, or sympathoplegic, drugs. They
primarily work as an antagonist to the adrenergic receptors. They block the ability of norepinephrine or epinephrine
to bind to the receptors so that the effect is “cut” or “takes a blow,” to refer to the endings “-lytic” and “-plegic,”
respectively. The various drugs of this class will be specific to α-adrenergic or β-adrenergic receptors, or to their
receptor subtypes.
Possibly the most familiar type of sympatholytic drug are the β-blockers. These drugs are often used to treat
cardiovascular disease because they block the β-receptors associated with vasoconstriction and cardioacceleration.
By allowing blood vessels to dilate, or keeping heart rate from increasing, these drugs can improve cardiac function
in a compromised system, such as for a person with congestive heart failure or who has previously suffered a heart
attack. A couple of common versions of β-blockers are metoprolol, which specifically blocks the β1-receptor, and
propanolol, which nonspecifically blocks β-receptors. There are other drugs that are α-blockers and can affect the
sympathetic system in a similar way.
Other uses for sympatholytic drugs are as antianxiety medications. A common example of this is clonidine, which is
an α-agonist. The sympathetic system is tied to anxiety to the point that the sympathetic response can be referred
612
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
to as “fight, flight, or fright.” Clonidine is used for other treatments aside from hypertension and anxiety, including
pain conditions and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Parasympathetic Effects
Drugs affecting parasympathetic functions can be classified into those that increase or decrease activity at
postganglionic terminals. Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers release ACh, and the receptors on the targets are
muscarinic receptors. There are several types of muscarinic receptors, M1–M5, but the drugs are not usually
specific to the specific types. Parasympathetic drugs can be either muscarinic agonists or antagonists, or have
indirect effects on the cholinergic system. Drugs that enhance cholinergic effects are called parasympathomimetic
drugs, whereas those that inhibit cholinergic effects are referred to as anticholinergic drugs.
Pilocarpine is a nonspecific muscarinic agonist commonly used to treat disorders of the eye. It reverses mydriasis,
such as is caused by phenylephrine, and can be administered after an eye exam. Along with constricting the pupil
through the smooth muscle of the iris, pilocarpine will also cause the ciliary muscle to contract. This will open
perforations at the base of the cornea, allowing for the drainage of aqueous humor from the anterior compartment
of the eye and, therefore, reducing intraocular pressure related to glaucoma.
Atropine and scopolamine are part of a class of muscarinic antagonists that come from the Atropa genus of plants
that include belladonna or deadly nightshade (Figure 15.15). The name of one of these plants, belladonna, refers to
the fact that extracts from this plant were used cosmetically for dilating the pupil. The active chemicals from this
plant block the muscarinic receptors in the iris and allow the pupil to dilate, which is considered attractive because
it makes the eyes appear larger. Humans are instinctively attracted to anything with larger eyes, which comes from
the fact that the ratio of eye-to-head size is different in infants (or baby animals) and can elicit an emotional
response. The cosmetic use of belladonna extract was essentially acting on this response. Atropine is no longer
used in this cosmetic capacity for reasons related to the other name for the plant, which is deadly nightshade.
Suppression of parasympathetic function, especially when it becomes systemic, can be fatal. Autonomic regulation
is disrupted and anticholinergic symptoms develop. The berries of this plant are highly toxic, but can be mistaken for
other berries. The antidote for atropine or scopolamine poisoning is pilocarpine.
FIGURE 15.15
Belladonna Plant
The plant from the genus Atropa, which is known as belladonna or deadly nightshade, was used
cosmetically to dilate pupils, but can be fatal when ingested. The berries on the plant may seem attractive as a fruit, but they contain the
same anticholinergic compounds as the rest of the plant.
15.4 • Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
613
Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Effects of Different Drug Types
Drug type
Example(s)
Sympathetic effect
Parasympathetic
effect
Overall result
Nicotinic agonists
Nicotine
Mimic ACh at
preganglionic
synapses, causing
activation of
postganglionic fibers
and the release of
norepinephrine onto
the target organ
Mimic ACh at
preganglionic
synapses, causing
activation of
postganglionic fibers
and the release of
ACh onto the target
organ
Most conflicting
signals cancel each
other out, but
cardiovascular
system is
susceptible to
hypertension and
arrhythmias
Sympathomimetic
drugs
Phenylephrine
Bind to adrenergic
receptors or mimics
sympathetic action in
some other way
No effect
Increase
sympathetic tone
Sympatholytic
drugs
β-blockers
such as
propanolol or
metoprolol; α-
agonists such
as clonidine
Block binding to
adrenergic drug or
decrease adrenergic
signals
No effect
Increase
parasympathetic
tone
Parasymphatho-
mimetics/
muscarinic
agonists
Pilocarpine
No effect, except on
sweat glands
Bind to muscarinic
receptor, similar to
ACh
Increase
parasympathetic
tone
Anticholinergics/
muscarinic
antagonists
Atropine,
scopolamine,
dimenhydrinate
No effect
Block muscarinic
receptors and
parasympathetic
function
Increase
sympathetic tone
TABLE 15.2
Disorders of the...
Autonomic Nervous System
Approximately 33 percent of people experience a mild problem with motion sickness, whereas up to 66 percent
experience motion sickness under extreme conditions, such as being on a tossing boat with no view of the
horizon. Connections between regions in the brain stem and the autonomic system result in the symptoms of
nausea, cold sweats, and vomiting.
The part of the brain responsible for vomiting, or emesis, is known as the area postrema. It is located next to the
fourth ventricle and is not restricted by the blood–brain barrier, which allows it to respond to chemicals in the
bloodstream—namely, toxins that will stimulate emesis. There are significant connections between this area, the
solitary nucleus, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. These autonomic system and nuclei
connections are associated with the symptoms of motion sickness.
Motion sickness is the result of conflicting information from the visual and vestibular systems. If motion is
614
15 • The Autonomic Nervous System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/3Dmovies) to learn about the side effects of 3-D movies. As discussed in this
video, movies that are shot in 3-D can cause motion sickness, which elicits the autonomic symptoms of nausea and
sweating. The disconnection between the perceived motion on the screen and the lack of any change in equilibrium
stimulates these symptoms. Why do you think sitting close to the screen or right in the middle of the theater makes
motion sickness during a 3-D movie worse?
perceived by the visual system without the complementary vestibular stimuli, or through vestibular stimuli
without visual confirmation, the brain stimulates emesis and the associated symptoms. The area postrema, by
itself, appears to be able to stimulate emesis in response to toxins in the blood, but it is also connected to the
autonomic system and can trigger a similar response to motion.
Autonomic drugs are used to combat motion sickness. Though it is often described as a dangerous and deadly
drug, scopolamine is used to treat motion sickness. A popular treatment for motion sickness is the transdermal
scopolamine patch. Scopolamine is one of the substances derived from the Atropa genus along with atropine. At
higher doses, those substances are thought to be poisonous and can lead to an extreme sympathetic syndrome.
However, the transdermal patch regulates the release of the drug, and the concentration is kept very low so that
the dangers are avoided. For those who are concerned about using “The Most Dangerous Drug,” as some
websites will call it, antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate (Dramamine®) can be used.
15.4 • Drugs that Affect the Autonomic System
615
Key Terms
acetylcholine (ACh)
neurotransmitter that binds at a
motor end-plate to trigger depolarization
adrenal medulla
interior portion of the adrenal (or
suprarenal) gland that releases epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the bloodstream as hormones
adrenergic
synapse where norepinephrine is
released, which binds to α- or β-adrenergic
receptors
afferent branch
component of a reflex arc that
represents the input from a sensory neuron, for
either a special or general sense
agonist
any exogenous substance that binds to a
receptor and produces a similar effect to the
endogenous ligand
alpha (α)-adrenergic receptor
one of the receptors
to which epinephrine and norepinephrine bind,
which comes in two subtypes: α1 and α2
antagonist
any exogenous substance that binds to a
receptor and produces an opposing effect to the
endogenous ligand
anticholinergic drugs
drugs that interrupt or reduce
the function of the parasympathetic system
autonomic tone
tendency of an organ system to be
governed by one division of the autonomic nervous
system over the other, such as heart rate being
lowered by parasympathetic input at rest
baroreceptor
mechanoreceptor that senses the
stretch of blood vessels to indicate changes in blood
pressure
beta (β)-adrenergic receptor
one of the receptors to
which epinephrine and norepinephrine bind, which
comes in three subtypes: β1, β2, and β3
cardiac accelerator nerves
preganglionic
sympathetic fibers that cause the heart rate to
increase when the cardiovascular center in the
medulla initiates a signal
cardiovascular center
region in the medulla that
controls the cardiovascular system through cardiac
accelerator nerves and vasomotor nerves, which are
components of the sympathetic division of the
autonomic nervous system
celiac ganglion
one of the collateral ganglia of the
sympathetic system that projects to the digestive
system
central neuron
specifically referring to the cell body
of a neuron in the autonomic system that is located
in the central nervous system, specifically the
lateral horn of the spinal cord or a brain stem
nucleus
cholinergic
synapse at which acetylcholine is
released and binds to the nicotinic or muscarinic
receptor
chromaffin cells
neuroendocrine cells of the adrenal
medulla that release epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the bloodstream as part of
sympathetic system activity
ciliary ganglion
one of the terminal ganglia of the
parasympathetic system, located in the posterior
orbit, axons from which project to the iris
collateral ganglia
ganglia outside of the sympathetic
chain that are targets of sympathetic preganglionic
fibers, which are the celiac, inferior mesenteric, and
superior mesenteric ganglia
craniosacral system
alternate name for the
parasympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
system that is based on the anatomical location of
central neurons in brain-stem nuclei and the lateral
horn of the sacral spinal cord; also referred to as
craniosacral outflow
dorsal longitudinal fasciculus
major output pathway
of the hypothalamus that descends through the gray
matter of the brain stem and into the spinal cord
dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve
location of
parasympathetic neurons that project through the
vagus nerve to terminal ganglia in the thoracic and
abdominal cavities
Edinger–Westphal nucleus
location of
parasympathetic neurons that project to the ciliary
ganglion
efferent branch
component of a reflex arc that
represents the output, with the target being an
effector, such as muscle or glandular tissue
endogenous
describes substance made in the human
body
endogenous chemical
substance produced and
released within the body to interact with a receptor
protein
epinephrine
signaling molecule released from the
adrenal medulla into the bloodstream as part of the
sympathetic response
exogenous
describes substance made outside of the
human body
exogenous chemical
substance from a source
outside the body, whether it be another organism
such as a plant or from the synthetic processes of a
laboratory, that binds to a transmembrane receptor
protein
fight-or-flight response
set of responses induced by
sympathetic activity that lead to either fleeing a
threat or standing up to it, which in the modern
world is often associated with anxious feelings
G protein–coupled receptor
membrane protein
complex that consists of a receptor protein that
binds to a signaling molecule—a G protein—that is
616
15 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
activated by that binding and in turn activates an
effector protein (enzyme) that creates a second-
messenger molecule in the cytoplasm of the target
cell
ganglionic neuron
specifically refers to the cell body
of a neuron in the autonomic system that is located
in a ganglion
gray rami communicantes
(singular = ramus
communicans) unmyelinated structures that provide
a short connection from a sympathetic chain
ganglion to the spinal nerve that contains the
postganglionic sympathetic fiber
greater splanchnic nerve
nerve that contains fibers
of the central sympathetic neurons that do not
synapse in the chain ganglia but project onto the
celiac ganglion
inferior mesenteric ganglion
one of the collateral
ganglia of the sympathetic system that projects to
the digestive system
intramural ganglia
terminal ganglia of the
parasympathetic system that are found within the
walls of the target effector
lesser splanchnic nerve
nerve that contains fibers of
the central sympathetic neurons that do not
synapse in the chain ganglia but project onto the
inferior mesenteric ganglion
ligand-gated cation channel
ion channel, such as the
nicotinic receptor, that is specific to positively
charged ions and opens when a molecule such as a
neurotransmitter binds to it
limbic lobe
structures arranged around the edges of
the cerebrum that are involved in memory and
emotion
long reflex
reflex arc that includes the central
nervous system
medial forebrain bundle
fiber pathway that extends
anteriorly into the basal forebrain, passes through
the hypothalamus, and extends into the brain stem
and spinal cord
mesenteric plexus
nervous tissue within the wall of
the digestive tract that contains neurons that are
the targets of autonomic preganglionic fibers and
that project to the smooth muscle and glandular
tissues in the digestive organ
muscarinic receptor
type of acetylcholine receptor
protein that is characterized by also binding to
muscarine and is a metabotropic receptor
mydriasis
dilation of the pupil; typically the result of
disease, trauma, or drugs
nicotinic receptor
type of acetylcholine receptor
protein that is characterized by also binding to
nicotine and is an ionotropic receptor
norepinephrine
signaling molecule released as a
neurotransmitter by most postganglionic
sympathetic fibers as part of the sympathetic
response, or as a hormone into the bloodstream
from the adrenal medulla
nucleus ambiguus
brain-stem nucleus that contains
neurons that project through the vagus nerve to
terminal ganglia in the thoracic cavity; specifically
associated with the heart
parasympathetic division
division of the autonomic
nervous system responsible for restful and digestive
functions
parasympathomimetic drugs
drugs that enhance or
mimic the function of the parasympathetic system
paravertebral ganglia
autonomic ganglia superior to
the sympathetic chain ganglia
postganglionic fiber
axon from a ganglionic neuron in
the autonomic nervous system that projects to and
synapses with the target effector; sometimes
referred to as a postganglionic neuron
preganglionic fiber
axon from a central neuron in the
autonomic nervous system that projects to and
synapses with a ganglionic neuron; sometimes
referred to as a preganglionic neuron
prevertebral ganglia
autonomic ganglia that are
anterior to the vertebral column and functionally
related to the sympathetic chain ganglia
referred pain
the conscious perception of visceral
sensation projected to a different region of the body,
such as the left shoulder and arm pain as a sign for a
heart attack
reflex arc
circuit of a reflex that involves a sensory
input and motor output, or an afferent branch and
an efferent branch, and an integrating center to
connect the two branches
rest and digest
set of functions associated with the
parasympathetic system that lead to restful actions
and digestion
short reflex
reflex arc that does not include any
components of the central nervous system
somatic reflex
reflex involving skeletal muscle as the
effector, under the control of the somatic nervous
system
superior cervical ganglion
one of the paravertebral
ganglia of the sympathetic system that projects to
the head
superior mesenteric ganglion
one of the collateral
ganglia of the sympathetic system that projects to
the digestive system
sympathetic chain ganglia
series of ganglia adjacent
to the vertebral column that receive input from
central sympathetic neurons
sympathetic division
division of the autonomic
nervous system associated with the fight-or-flight
15 • Key Terms
617
response
sympatholytic drug
drug that interrupts, or “lyses,”
the function of the sympathetic system
sympathomimetic drug
drug that enhances or
mimics the function of the sympathetic system
target effector
organ, tissue, or gland that will
respond to the control of an autonomic or somatic
or endocrine signal
terminal ganglia
ganglia of the parasympathetic
division of the autonomic system, which are located
near or within the target effector, the latter also
known as intramural ganglia
thoracolumbar system
alternate name for the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
system that is based on the anatomical location of
central neurons in the lateral horn of the thoracic
and upper lumbar spinal cord
varicosity
structure of some autonomic connections
that is not a typical synaptic end bulb, but a string of
swellings along the length of a fiber that makes a
network of connections with the target effector
vasomotor nerves
preganglionic sympathetic fibers
that cause the constriction of blood vessels in
response to signals from the cardiovascular center
visceral reflex
reflex involving an internal organ as
the effector, under the control of the autonomic
nervous system
white rami communicantes
(singular = ramus
communicans) myelinated structures that provide a
short connection from a sympathetic chain ganglion
to the spinal nerve that contains the preganglionic
sympathetic fiber
Chapter Review
15.1 Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous
System
The primary responsibilities of the autonomic nervous
system are to regulate homeostatic mechanisms in the
body, which is also part of what the endocrine system
does. The key to understanding the autonomic system
is to explore the response pathways—the output of the
nervous system. The way we respond to the world
around us, to manage the internal environment on the
basis of the external environment, is divided between
two parts of the autonomic nervous system. The
sympathetic division responds to threats and produces
a readiness to confront the threat or to run away: the
fight-or-flight response. The parasympathetic division
plays the opposite role. When the external environment
does not present any immediate danger, a restful mode
descends on the body, and the digestive system is
more active.
The sympathetic output of the nervous system
originates out of the lateral horn of the thoracolumbar
spinal cord. An axon from one of these central neurons
projects by way of the ventral spinal nerve root and
spinal nerve to a sympathetic ganglion, either in the
sympathetic chain ganglia or one of the collateral
locations, where it synapses on a ganglionic neuron.
These preganglionic fibers release ACh, which excites
the ganglionic neuron through the nicotinic receptor.
The axon from the ganglionic neuron—the
postganglionic fiber—then projects to a target effector
where it will release norepinephrine to bind to an
adrenergic receptor, causing a change in the physiology
of that organ in keeping with the broad, divergent
sympathetic response. The postganglionic connections
to sweat glands in the skin and blood vessels supplying
skeletal muscle are, however, exceptions; those fibers
release ACh onto muscarinic receptors. The
sympathetic system has a specialized preganglionic
connection to the adrenal medulla that causes
epinephrine and norepinephrine to be released into the
bloodstream rather than exciting a neuron that
contacts an organ directly. This hormonal component
means that the sympathetic chemical signal can
spread throughout the body very quickly and affect
many organ systems at once.
The parasympathetic output is based in the brain stem
and sacral spinal cord. Neurons from particular nuclei
in the brain stem or from the lateral horn of the sacral
spinal cord (preganglionic neurons) project to terminal
(intramural) ganglia located close to or within the wall
of target effectors. These preganglionic fibers also
release ACh onto nicotinic receptors to excite the
ganglionic neurons. The postganglionic fibers then
contact the target tissues within the organ to release
ACh, which binds to muscarinic receptors to induce
rest-and-digest responses.
Signaling molecules utilized by the autonomic nervous
system are released from axons and can be considered
as either neurotransmitters (when they directly interact
with the effector) or as hormones (when they are
released into the bloodstream). The same molecule,
such as norepinephrine, could be considered either a
neurotransmitter or a hormone on the basis of whether
it is released from a postganglionic sympathetic axon
or from the adrenal gland. The synapses in the
autonomic system are not always the typical type of
connection first described in the neuromuscular
junction. Instead of having synaptic end bulbs at the
very end of an axonal fiber, they may have
618
15 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
swellings—called varicosities—along the length of a
fiber so that it makes a network of connections within
the target tissue.
15.2 Autonomic Reflexes and Homeostasis
Autonomic nervous system function is based on the
visceral reflex. This reflex is similar to the somatic
reflex, but the efferent branch is composed of two
neurons. The central neuron projects from the spinal
cord or brain stem to synapse on the ganglionic neuron
that projects to the effector. The afferent branch of the
somatic and visceral reflexes is very similar, as many
somatic and special senses activate autonomic
responses. However, there are visceral senses that do
not form part of conscious perception. If a visceral
sensation, such as cardiac pain, is strong enough, it will
rise to the level of consciousness. However, the
sensory homunculus does not provide a representation
of the internal structures to the same degree as the
surface of the body, so visceral sensations are often
experienced as referred pain, such as feelings of pain
in the left shoulder and arm in connection with a heart
attack.
The role of visceral reflexes is to maintain a balance of
function in the organ systems of the body. The two
divisions of the autonomic system each play a role in
effecting change, usually in competing directions. The
sympathetic system increases heart rate, whereas the
parasympathetic system decreases heart rate. The
sympathetic system dilates the pupil of the eye,
whereas the parasympathetic system constricts the
pupil. The competing inputs can contribute to the
resting tone of the organ system. Heart rate is normally
under parasympathetic tone, whereas blood pressure
is normally under sympathetic tone. The heart rate is
slowed by the autonomic system at rest, whereas
blood vessels retain a slight constriction at rest.
In a few systems of the body, the competing input from
the two divisions is not the norm. The sympathetic tone
of blood vessels is caused by the lack of
parasympathetic input to the systemic circulatory
system. Only certain regions receive parasympathetic
input that relaxes the smooth muscle wall of the blood
vessels. Sweat glands are another example, which only
receive input from the sympathetic system.
15.3 Central Control
The autonomic system integrates sensory information
and higher cognitive processes to generate output,
which balances homeostatic mechanisms. The central
autonomic structure is the hypothalamus, which
coordinates sympathetic and parasympathetic efferent
pathways to regulate activities of the organ systems of
the body. The majority of hypothalamic output travels
through the medial forebrain bundle and the dorsal
longitudinal fasciculus to influence brain stem and
spinal components of the autonomic nervous system.
The medial forebrain bundle also connects the
hypothalamus with higher centers of the limbic system
where emotion can influence visceral responses. The
amygdala is a structure within the limbic system that
influences the hypothalamus in the regulation of the
autonomic system, as well as the endocrine system.
These higher centers have descending control of the
autonomic system through brain stem centers,
primarily in the medulla, such as the cardiovascular
center. This collection of medullary nuclei regulates
cardiac function, as well as blood pressure. Sensory
input from the heart, aorta, and carotid sinuses project
to these regions of the medulla. The solitary nucleus
increases sympathetic tone of the cardiovascular
system through the cardiac accelerator and vasomotor
nerves. The nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal motor
nucleus both contribute fibers to the vagus nerve,
which exerts parasympathetic control of the heart by
decreasing heart rate.
15.4 Drugs that Affect the Autonomic
System
The autonomic system is affected by a number of
exogenous agents, including some that are therapeutic
and some that are illicit. These drugs affect the
autonomic system by mimicking or interfering with the
endogenous agents or their receptors. A survey of how
different drugs affect autonomic function illustrates the
role that the neurotransmitters and hormones play in
autonomic function. Drugs can be thought of as
chemical tools to effect changes in the system with
some precision, based on where those drugs are
effective.
Nicotine is not a drug that is used therapeutically,
except for smoking cessation. When it is introduced
into the body via products, it has broad effects on the
autonomic system. Nicotine carries a risk for
cardiovascular disease because of these broad effects.
The drug stimulates both sympathetic and
parasympathetic ganglia at the preganglionic fiber
synapse. For most organ systems in the body, the
competing input from the two postganglionic fibers will
essentially cancel each other out. However, for the
cardiovascular system, the results are different.
Because there is essentially no parasympathetic
influence on blood pressure for the entire body, the
sympathetic input is increased by nicotine, causing an
15 • Chapter Review
619
increase in blood pressure. Also, the influence that the
autonomic system has on the heart is not the same as
for other systems. Other organs have smooth muscle or
glandular tissue that is activated or inhibited by the
autonomic system. Cardiac muscle is intrinsically
active and is modulated by the autonomic system. The
contradictory signals do not just cancel each other out,
they alter the regularity of the heart rate and can cause
arrhythmias. Both hypertension and arrhythmias are
risk factors for heart disease.
Other drugs affect one division of the autonomic
system or the other. The sympathetic system is
affected by drugs that mimic the actions of adrenergic
molecules (norepinephrine and epinephrine) and are
called sympathomimetic drugs. Drugs such as
phenylephrine bind to the adrenergic receptors and
stimulate target organs just as sympathetic activity
would. Other drugs are sympatholytic because they
block adrenergic activity and cancel the sympathetic
influence on the target organ. Drugs that act on the
parasympathetic system also work by either enhancing
the postganglionic signal or blocking it. A muscarinic
agonist (or parasympathomimetic drug) acts just like
ACh released by the parasympathetic postganglionic
fiber. Anticholinergic drugs block muscarinic receptors,
suppressing parasympathetic interaction with the
organ.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/fightflight)
to learn more about adrenaline and the fight-or-
flight response. When someone is said to have a
rush of adrenaline, the image of bungee jumpers or
skydivers usually comes to mind. But adrenaline,
also known as epinephrine, is an important
chemical in coordinating the body’s fight-or-flight
response. In this video, you look inside the
physiology of the fight-or-flight response, as
envisioned for a firefighter. His body’s reaction is
the result of the sympathetic division of the
autonomic nervous system causing system-wide
changes as it prepares for extreme responses. What
two changes does adrenaline bring about to help
the skeletal muscle response?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
nervsystem1) to learn more about the nervous
system. As described in this video, the nervous
system has a way to deal with threats and stress
that is separate from the conscious control of the
somatic nervous system. The system comes from a
time when threats were about survival, but in the
modern age, these responses become part of stress
and anxiety. This video describes how the
autonomic system is only part of the response to
threats, or stressors. What other organ system gets
involved, and what part of the brain coordinates the
two systems for the entire response, including
epinephrine (adrenaline) and cortisol?
3. Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/strokespell)
to learn about a teenager who experiences a series
of spells that suggest a stroke. He undergoes
endless tests and seeks input from multiple
doctors. In the end, one expert, one question, and a
simple blood pressure cuff answers the question.
Why would the heart have to beat faster when the
teenager changes his body position from lying down
to sitting, and then to standing?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/pupillary) to
learn about the pupillary reflexes. The pupillary
light reflex involves sensory input through the optic
nerve and motor response through the oculomotor
nerve to the ciliary ganglion, which projects to the
circular fibers of the iris. As shown in this short
animation, pupils will constrict to limit the amount
of light falling on the retina under bright lighting
conditions. What constitutes the afferent and
efferent branches of the competing reflex
(dilation)?
5. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/emotions)
to learn about physical responses to emotion. The
autonomic system, which is important for regulating
the homeostasis of the organ systems, is also
responsible for our physiological responses to
emotions such as fear. The video summarizes the
extent of the body’s reactions and describes several
effects of the autonomic system in response to fear.
On the basis of what you have already studied
about autonomic function, which effect would you
expect to be associated with parasympathetic,
rather than sympathetic, activity?
620
15 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
6. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/3Dmovies)
to learn about the side effects of 3-D movies. As
discussed in this video, movies that are shot in 3-D
can cause motion sickness, which elicits the
autonomic symptoms of nausea and sweating. The
disconnection between the perceived motion on the
screen and the lack of any change in equilibrium
stimulates these symptoms. Why do you think
sitting close to the screen or right in the middle of
the theater makes motion sickness during a 3-D
movie worse?
Review Questions
7. Which of these physiological changes would not be
considered part of the sympathetic fight-or-flight
response?
a.
increased heart rate
b.
increased sweating
c.
dilated pupils
d.
increased stomach motility
8. Which type of fiber could be considered the
longest?
a.
preganglionic parasympathetic
b.
preganglionic sympathetic
c.
postganglionic parasympathetic
d.
postganglionic sympathetic
9. Which signaling molecule is most likely responsible
for an increase in digestive activity?
a.
epinephrine
b.
norepinephrine
c.
acetylcholine
d.
adrenaline
10. Which of these cranial nerves contains
preganglionic parasympathetic fibers?
a.
optic, CN II
b.
facial, CN VII
c.
trigeminal, CN V
d.
hypoglossal, CN XII
11. Which of the following is not a target of a
sympathetic preganglionic fiber?
a.
intermural ganglion
b.
collateral ganglion
c.
adrenal gland
d.
chain ganglion
12. Which of the following represents a sensory input
that is not part of both the somatic and autonomic
systems?
a.
vision
b.
taste
c.
baroreception
d.
proprioception
13. What is the term for a reflex that does not include
a CNS component?
a.
long reflex
b.
visceral reflex
c.
somatic reflex
d.
short reflex
14. What neurotransmitter will result in constriction of
the pupil?
a.
norepinephrine
b.
acetylcholine
c.
epinephrine
d.
serotonin
15. What gland produces a secretion that causes
fight-or-flight responses in effectors?
a.
adrenal medulla
b.
salivatory gland
c.
reproductive gland
d.
thymus
16. Which of the following is an incorrect pairing?
a.
norepinephrine dilates the pupil
b.
epinephrine increases blood pressure
c.
acetylcholine decreases digestion
d.
norepinephrine increases heart rate
17. Which of these locations in the forebrain is the
master control center for homeostasis through the
autonomic and endocrine systems?
a.
hypothalamus
b.
thalamus
c.
amygdala
d.
cerebral cortex
15 • Review Questions
621
18. Which nerve projects to the hypothalamus to
indicate the level of light stimuli in the retina?
a.
glossopharyngeal
b.
oculomotor
c.
optic
d.
vagus
19. What region of the limbic lobe is responsible for
generating stress responses via the
hypothalamus?
a.
hippocampus
b.
amygdala
c.
mammillary bodies
d.
prefrontal cortex
20. What is another name for the preganglionic
sympathetic fibers that project to the heart?
a.
solitary tract
b.
vasomotor nerve
c.
vagus nerve
d.
cardiac accelerator nerve
21. What central fiber tract connects forebrain and
brain stem structures with the hypothalamus?
a.
cardiac accelerator nerve
b.
medial forebrain bundle
c.
dorsal longitudinal fasciculus
d.
corticospinal tract
22. A drug that affects both divisions of the autonomic
system is going to bind to, or block, which type of
neurotransmitter receptor?
a.
nicotinic
b.
muscarinic
c.
α-adrenergic
d.
β-adrenergic
23. A drug is called an agonist if it ________.
a.
blocks a receptor
b.
interferes with neurotransmitter reuptake
c.
acts like the endogenous neurotransmitter by
binding to its receptor
d.
blocks the voltage-gated calcium ion channel
24. Which type of drug would be an antidote to
atropine poisoning?
a.
nicotinic agonist
b.
anticholinergic
c.
muscarinic agonist
d.
α-blocker
25. Which kind of drug would have anti-anxiety
effects?
a.
nicotinic agonist
b.
anticholinergic
c.
muscarinic agonist
d.
α-blocker
26. Which type of drug could be used to treat asthma
by opening airways wider?
a.
sympatholytic drug
b.
sympathomimetic drug
c.
anticholinergic drug
d.
parasympathomimetic drug
Critical Thinking Questions
27. In the context of a lioness hunting on the
savannah, why would the sympathetic system not
activate the digestive system?
28. A target effector, such as the heart, receives input
from the sympathetic and parasympathetic
systems. What is the actual difference between
the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions at
the level of those connections (i.e., at the
synapse)?
29. Damage to internal organs will present as pain
associated with a particular surface area of the
body. Why would something like irritation to the
diaphragm, which is between the thoracic and
abdominal cavities, feel like pain in the shoulder
or neck?
30. Medical practice is paying more attention to the
autonomic system in considering disease states.
Why would autonomic tone be important in
considering cardiovascular disease?
31. Horner’s syndrome is a condition that presents
with changes in one eye, such as pupillary
constriction and dropping of eyelids, as well as
decreased sweating in the face. Why could a
tumor in the thoracic cavity have an effect on
these autonomic functions?
32. The cardiovascular center is responsible for
regulating the heart and blood vessels through
homeostatic mechanisms. What tone does each
component of the cardiovascular system have?
What connections does the cardiovascular center
invoke to keep these two systems in their resting
tone?
622
15 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
33. Why does smoking increase the risk of heart
disease? Provide two reasons based on autonomic
function.
34. Why might topical, cosmetic application of
atropine or scopolamine from the belladonna
plant not cause fatal poisoning, as would occur
with ingestion of the plant?
15 • Critical Thinking Questions
623
624
15 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 16
The Neurological Exam
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the major sections of the neurological exam
•
Outline the benefits of rapidly assessing neurological function
•
Relate anatomical structures of the nervous system to specific functions
•
Diagram the connections of the nervous system to the musculature and integument involved in primary
sensorimotor responses
•
Compare and contrast the somatic and visceral reflexes with respect to how they are assessed through the
neurological exam
A man arrives at the hospital after feeling faint and complaining of a “pins-and-needles” feeling all
along one side of his body. The most likely explanation is that he has suffered a stroke, which has caused a loss of
oxygen to a particular part of the central nervous system (CNS). The problem is finding where in the entire nervous
system the stroke has occurred. By checking reflexes, sensory responses, and motor control, a health care provider
can focus on what abilities the patient may have lost as a result of the stroke and can use this information to
determine where the injury occurred. In the emergency department of the hospital, this kind of rapid assessment of
neurological function is key to treating trauma to the nervous system. In the classroom, the neurological exam is a
valuable tool for learning the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system because it allows you to relate the
functions of the system to particular locations in the nervous system.
As a student of anatomy and physiology, you may be planning to go into an allied health field, perhaps nursing or
physical therapy. You could be in the emergency department treating a patient such as the one just described. An
important part of this course is to understand the nervous system. This can be especially challenging because you
need to learn about the nervous system using your own nervous system. The first chapter in this unit about the
nervous system began with a quote: “If the human brain were simple enough for us to understand, we would be too
simple to understand it.” However, you are being asked to understand aspects of it. A healthcare provider can
pinpoint problems with the nervous system in minutes by running through the series of tasks to test neurological
function that are described in this chapter. You can use the same approach, though not as quickly, to learn about
neurological function and its relationship to the structures of the nervous system.
Nervous tissue is different from other tissues in that it is not classified into separate tissue types. It does contain
two types of cells, neurons and glia, but it is all just nervous tissue. White matter and gray matter are not types of
Figure 16.1
Neurological Exam Health care professionals, such as this air force nurse, can rapidly assess the neurological functions of a
patient using the neurological exam. One part of the exam is the inspection of the oral cavity and pharynx, which enables the doctor to not
only inspect the tissues for signs of infection, but also provides a means to test the functions of the cranial nerves associated with the oral
cavity. (credit: U.S. Department of Defense / AMISOM Public Information/Flickr)
nervous tissue, but indications of different specializations within the nervous tissue. However, not all nervous tissue
performs the same function. Furthermore, specific functions are not wholly localized to individual brain structures in
the way that other bodily functions occur strictly within specific organs. In the CNS, we must consider the
connections between cells over broad areas, not just the function of cells in one particular nucleus or region. In a
broad sense, the nervous system is responsible for the majority of electrochemical signaling in the body, but the use
of those signals is different in various regions.
The nervous system is made up of the brain and spinal cord as the central organs, and the ganglia and nerves as
organs in the periphery. The brain and spinal cord can be thought of as a collection of smaller organs, most of which
would be the nuclei (such as the oculomotor nuclei), but white matter structures play an important role (such as the
corpus callosum). Studying the nervous system requires an understanding of the varied physiology of the nervous
system. For example, the hypothalamus plays a very different role than the visual cortex. The neurological exam
provides a way to elicit behavior that represents those varied functions.
16.1 Overview of the Neurological Exam
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the major sections of the neurological exam
•
Explain the connection between location and function in the nervous system
•
Explain the benefit of a rapid assessment for neurological function in a clinical setting
•
List the causes of neurological deficits
•
Describe the different ischemic events in the nervous system
The neurological exam is a clinical assessment tool used to determine what specific parts of the CNS are affected
by damage or disease. It can be performed in a short time—sometimes as quickly as 5 minutes—to establish
neurological function. In the emergency department, this rapid assessment can make the difference with respect to
proper treatment and the extent of recovery that is possible.
The exam is a series of subtests separated into five major sections. The first of these is the mental status exam,
which assesses the higher cognitive functions such as memory, orientation, and language. Then there is the cranial
nerve exam, which tests the function of the 12 cranial nerves and, therefore, the central and peripheral structures
associated with them. The cranial nerve exam tests the sensory and motor functions of each of the nerves, as
applicable. Two major sections, the sensory exam and the motor exam, test the sensory and motor functions
associated with spinal nerves. Finally, the coordination exam tests the ability to perform complex and coordinated
movements. The gait exam, which is often considered a sixth major exam, specifically assesses the motor function
of walking and can be considered part of the coordination exam because walking is a coordinated movement.
Neuroanatomy and the Neurological Exam
Localization of function is the concept that circumscribed locations are responsible for specific functions. The
neurological exam highlights this relationship. For example, the cognitive functions that are assessed in the mental
status exam are based on functions in the cerebrum, mostly in the cerebral cortex. Several of the subtests examine
language function. Deficits in neurological function uncovered by these examinations usually point to damage to the
left cerebral cortex. In the majority of individuals, language function is localized to the left hemisphere between the
superior temporal lobe and the posterior frontal lobe, including the intervening connections through the inferior
parietal lobe.
The five major sections of the neurological exam are related to the major regions of the CNS (Figure 16.2). The
mental status exam assesses functions related to the cerebrum. The cranial nerve exam is for the nerves that
connect to the diencephalon and brain stem (as well as the olfactory connections to the forebrain). The coordination
exam and the related gait exam primarily assess the functions of the cerebellum. The motor and sensory exams are
associated with the spinal cord and its connections through the spinal nerves.
626
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 16.2
Anatomical Underpinnings of the Neurological Exam
The different regions of the CNS relate to the major sections of
the neurological exam: the mental status exam, cranial nerve exam, sensory exam, motor exam, and coordination exam (including the gait
exam).
Part of the power of the neurological exam is this link between structure and function. Testing the various functions
represented in the exam allows an accurate estimation of where the nervous system may be damaged. Consider the
patient described in the chapter introduction. In the emergency department, he is given a quick exam to find where
the deficit may be localized. Knowledge of where the damage occurred will lead to the most effective therapy.
In rapid succession, he is asked to smile, raise his eyebrows, stick out his tongue, and shrug his shoulders. The
doctor tests muscular strength by providing resistance against his arms and legs while he tries to lift them. With his
eyes closed, he has to indicate when he feels the tip of a pen touch his legs, arms, fingers, and face. He follows the
tip of a pen as the doctor moves it through the visual field and finally toward his face. A formal mental status exam is
not needed at this point; the patient will demonstrate any possible deficits in that area during normal interactions
with the interviewer. If cognitive or language deficits are apparent, the interviewer can pursue mental status in more
depth. All of this takes place in less than 5 minutes. The patient reports that he feels pins and needles in his left arm
and leg, and has trouble feeling the tip of the pen when he is touched on those limbs. This suggests a problem with
the sensory systems between the spinal cord and the brain. The emergency department has a lead to follow before
a CT scan is performed. He is put on aspirin therapy to limit the possibility of blood clots forming, in case the cause
is an embolus—an obstruction such as a blood clot that blocks the flow of blood in an artery or vein.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/neuroexam) to see a demonstration of the neurological exam—a series of
tests that can be performed rapidly when a patient is initially brought into an emergency department. The exam can
be repeated on a regular basis to keep a record of how and if neurological function changes over time. In what order
were the sections of the neurological exam tested in this video, and which section seemed to be left out?
Causes of Neurological Deficits
Damage to the nervous system can be limited to individual structures or can be distributed across broad areas of the
brain and spinal cord. Localized, limited injury to the nervous system is most often the result of circulatory
problems. Neurons are very sensitive to oxygen deprivation and will start to deteriorate within 1 or 2 minutes, and
16.1 • Overview of the Neurological Exam
627
permanent damage (cell death) could result within a few hours. The loss of blood flow to part of the brain is known
as a stroke, or a cerebrovascular accident (CVA).
There are two main types of stroke, depending on how the blood supply is compromised: ischemic and hemorrhagic.
An ischemic stroke is the loss of blood flow to an area because vessels are blocked or narrowed. This is often
caused by an embolus, which may be a blood clot or fat deposit. Ischemia may also be the result of thickening of the
blood vessel wall, or a drop in blood volume in the brain known as hypovolemia.
A related type of CVA is known as a transient ischemic attack (TIA), which is similar to a stroke although it does not
last as long. The diagnostic definition of a stroke includes effects that last at least 24 hours. Any stroke symptoms
that are resolved within a 24-hour period because of restoration of adequate blood flow are classified as a TIA.
A hemorrhagic stroke is bleeding into the brain because of a damaged blood vessel. Accumulated blood fills a
region of the cranial vault and presses against the tissue in the brain (Figure 16.3). Physical pressure on the brain
can cause the loss of function, as well as the squeezing of local arteries resulting in compromised blood flow beyond
the site of the hemorrhage. As blood pools in the nervous tissue and the vasculature is damaged, the blood-brain
barrier can break down and allow additional fluid to accumulate in the region, which is known as edema.
FIGURE 16.3
Hemorrhagic Stroke
(a) A hemorrhage into the tissue of the cerebrum results in a large accumulation of blood with an
additional edema in the adjacent tissue. The hemorrhagic area causes the entire brain to be disfigured as suggested here by the lateral
ventricles being squeezed into the opposite hemisphere. (b) A CT scan shows an intraparenchymal hemorrhage within the parietal lobe.
(credit b: James Heilman)
Whereas hemorrhagic stroke may involve bleeding into a large region of the CNS, such as into the deep white matter
of a cerebral hemisphere, other events can cause widespread damage and loss of neurological functions. Infectious
diseases can lead to loss of function throughout the CNS as components of nervous tissue, specifically astrocytes
and microglia, react to the disease. Blunt force trauma, such as from a motor vehicle accident, can physically
damage the CNS.
A class of disorders that affect the nervous system are the neurodegenerative diseases: Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Creutzfeld–Jacob disease, multiple
sclerosis (MS), and other disorders that are the result of nervous tissue degeneration. In diseases like Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s, or ALS, neurons die; in diseases like MS, myelin is affected. Some of these disorders affect motor
function, and others present with dementia. How patients with these disorders perform in the neurological exam
varies, but is often broad in its effects, such as memory deficits that compromise many aspects of the mental status
exam, or movement deficits that compromise aspects of the cranial nerve exam, the motor exam, or the
coordination exam. The causes of these disorders are also varied. Some are the result of genetics, such as
Huntington’s disease, or the result of autoimmunity, such as MS; others are not entirely understood, such as
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Current research suggests that many of these diseases are related in how the
degeneration takes place and may be treated by common therapies.
628
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
Finally, a common cause of neurological changes is observed in developmental disorders. Whether the result of
genetic factors or the environment during development, there are certain situations that result in neurological
functions being different from the expected norms. Developmental disorders are difficult to define because they are
caused by defects that existed in the past and disrupted the normal development of the CNS. These defects
probably involve multiple environmental and genetic factors—most of the time, we don’t know what the cause is
other than that it is more complex than just one factor. Furthermore, each defect on its own may not be a problem,
but when several are added together, they can disrupt growth processes that are not well understand in the first
place. For instance, it is possible for a stroke to damage a specific region of the brain and lead to the loss of the
ability to recognize faces (prosopagnosia). The link between cell death in the fusiform gyrus and the symptom is
relatively easy to understand. In contrast, similar deficits can be seen in children with the developmental disorder,
autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, these children do not lack a fusiform gyrus, nor is there any damage or
defect visible to this brain region. We conclude, rather poorly, that this brain region is not connected properly to
other brain regions.
Infection, trauma, and congenital disorders can all lead to significant signs, as identified through the neurological
exam. It is important to differentiate between an acute event, such as stroke, and a chronic or global condition such
as blunt force trauma. Responses seen in the neurological exam can help. A loss of language function observed in all
its aspects is more likely a global event as opposed to a discrete loss of one function, such as not being able to say
certain types of words. A concern, however, is that a specific function—such as controlling the muscles of
speech—may mask other language functions. The various subtests within the mental status exam can address these
finer points and help clarify the underlying cause of the neurological loss.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/neuroexam2) for an introduction to the neurological exam. Studying the
neurological exam can give insight into how structure and function in the nervous system are interdependent. This is
a tool both in the clinic and in the classroom, but for different reasons. In the clinic, this is a powerful but simple tool
to assess a patient’s neurological function. In the classroom, it is a different way to think about the nervous system.
Though medical technology provides noninvasive imaging and real-time functional data, the presenter says these
cannot replace the history at the core of the medical examination. What does history mean in the context of medical
practice?
16.2 The Mental Status Exam
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the relationship of mental status exam results to cerebral functions
•
Explain the categorization of regions of the cortex based on anatomy and physiology
•
Differentiate between primary, association, and integration areas of the cerebral cortex
•
Provide examples of localization of function related to the cerebral cortex
In the clinical setting, the set of subtests known as the mental status exam helps us understand the relationship of
the brain to the body. Ultimately, this is accomplished by assessing behavior. Tremors related to intentional
movements, incoordination, or the neglect of one side of the body can be indicative of failures of the connections of
the cerebrum either within the hemispheres, or from the cerebrum to other portions of the nervous system. There is
no strict test for what the cerebrum does alone, but rather in what it does through its control of the rest of the CNS,
the peripheral nervous system (PNS), and the musculature.
Sometimes eliciting a behavior is as simple as asking a question. Asking a patient to state their name is not only to
verify that the file folder in a health care provider’s hands is the correct one, but also to be sure that the patient is
aware, oriented, and capable of interacting with another person. If the answer to “What is your name?” is “Santa
Claus,” the person may have a problem understanding reality. If the person just stares at the examiner with a
confused look on their face, the person may have a problem understanding or producing speech.
16.2 • The Mental Status Exam
629
Functions of the Cerebral Cortex
The cerebrum is the seat of many of the higher mental functions, such as memory and learning, language, and
conscious perception, which are the subjects of subtests of the mental status exam. The cerebral cortex is the thin
layer of gray matter on the outside of the cerebrum. On average, it is approximately 2.55 mm thick and highly folded
to fit within the limited space of the cranial vault. These higher functions are distributed across various regions of
the cortex, and specific locations can be said to be responsible for particular functions. There is a limited set of
regions, for example, that are involved in language function, and they can be subdivided on the basis of the
particular part of language function that each governs.
The basis for parceling out areas of the cortex and attributing them to various functions has its root in pure
anatomical underpinnings. The German neurologist and histologist Korbinian Brodmann, who made a careful study
of the cytoarchitecture of the cerebrum around the turn of the nineteenth century, described approximately 50
regions of the cortex that differed enough from each other to be considered separate areas (Figure 16.4). Brodmann
made preparations of many different regions of the cerebral cortex to view with a microscope. He compared the
size, shape, and number of neurons to find anatomical differences in the various parts of the cerebral cortex.
Continued investigation into these anatomical areas over the subsequent 100 or more years has demonstrated a
strong correlation between the structures and the functions attributed to those structures. For example, the first
three areas in Brodmann’s list—which are in the postcentral gyrus—compose the primary somatosensory cortex.
Within this area, finer separation can be made on the basis of the concept of the sensory homunculus, as well as the
different submodalities of somatosensation such as touch, vibration, pain, temperature, or proprioception. Today,
we more frequently refer to these regions by their function (i.e., primary sensory cortex) than by the number
Brodmann assigned to them, but in some situations the use of Brodmann numbers persists.
FIGURE 16.4
Brodmann's Areas of the Cerebral Cortex
On the basis of cytoarchitecture, the anatomist Korbinian Brodmann
described the extensive array of cortical regions, as illustrated in this figure. Subsequent investigations found that these areas
corresponded very well to functional differences in the cerebral cortex. (credit: modification of work by “Looie496”/Wikimedia Commons,
based on original work by Korvinian Brodmann)
Area 17, as Brodmann described it, is also known as the primary visual cortex. Adjacent to that are areas 18 and 19,
which constitute subsequent regions of visual processing. Area 22 is the primary auditory cortex, and it is followed
by area 23, which further processes auditory information. Area 4 is the primary motor cortex in the precentral gyrus,
whereas area 6 is the premotor cortex. These areas suggest some specialization within the cortex for functional
processing, both in sensory and motor regions. The fact that Brodmann’s areas correlate so closely to functional
localization in the cerebral cortex demonstrates the strong link between structure and function in these regions.
Areas 1, 2, 3, 4, 17, and 22 are each described as primary cortical areas. The adjoining regions are each referred to
as association areas. Primary areas are where sensory information is initially received from the thalamus for
630
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
conscious perception, or—in the case of the primary motor cortex—where descending commands are sent down to
the brain stem or spinal cord to execute movements (Figure 16.5).
FIGURE 16.5
Types of Cortical Areas
The cerebral cortex can be described as containing three types of processing regions: primary,
association, and integration areas. The primary cortical areas are where sensory information is initially processed, or where motor
commands emerge to go to the brain stem or spinal cord. Association areas are adjacent to primary areas and further process the modality-
specific input. Multimodal integration areas are found where the modality-specific regions meet; they can process multiple modalities
together or different modalities on the basis of similar functions, such as spatial processing in vision or somatosensation.
A number of other regions, which extend beyond these primary or association areas of the cortex, are referred to as
integrative areas. These areas are found in the spaces between the domains for particular sensory or motor
functions, and they integrate multisensory information, or process sensory or motor information in more complex
ways. Consider, for example, the posterior parietal cortex that lies between the somatosensory cortex and visual
cortex regions. This has been ascribed to the coordination of visual and motor functions, such as reaching to pick up
a glass. The somatosensory function that would be part of this is the proprioceptive feedback from moving the arm
and hand. The weight of the glass, based on what it contains, will influence how those movements are executed.
Cognitive Abilities
Assessment of cerebral functions is directed at cognitive abilities. The abilities assessed through the mental status
exam can be separated into four groups: orientation and memory, language and speech, sensorium, and judgment
and abstract reasoning.
Orientation and Memory
Orientation is the patient’s awareness of their immediate circumstances. It is awareness of time, not in terms of the
clock, but of the date and what is occurring around the patient. It is awareness of place, such that a patient should
know where they are and why. It is also awareness of who the patient is—recognizing personal identity and being
able to relate that to the examiner. The initial tests of orientation are based on the questions, “Do you know what the
date is?” or “Do you know where you are?” or “What is your name?” Further understanding of a patient’s awareness
of orientation can come from questions that address remote memory, such as “Who is the President of the United
States?”, or asking what happened on a specific date.
There are also specific tasks to address memory. One is the three-word recall test. The patient is given three words
to recall, such as book, clock, and shovel. After a short interval, during which other parts of the interview continue,
the patient is asked to recall the three words. Other tasks that assess memory—aside from those related to
orientation—have the patient recite the months of the year in reverse order to avoid the overlearned sequence and
focus on the memory of the months in an order, or to spell common words backwards, or to recite a list of numbers
back.
Memory is largely a function of the temporal lobe, along with structures beneath the cerebral cortex such as the
hippocampus and the amygdala. The storage of memory requires these structures of the medial temporal lobe. A
16.2 • The Mental Status Exam
631
famous case of a man who had both medial temporal lobes removed to treat intractable epilepsy provided insight
into the relationship between the structures of the brain and the function of memory.
Henry Molaison, who was referred to as patient HM when he was alive, had epilepsy localized to both of his medial
temporal lobes. In 1953, a bilateral lobectomy was performed that alleviated the epilepsy but resulted in the
inability for HM to form new memories—a condition called anterograde amnesia. HM was able to recall most events
from before his surgery, although there was a partial loss of earlier memories, which is referred to as retrograde
amnesia. HM became the subject of extensive studies into how memory works. What he was unable to do was form
new memories of what happened to him, what are now called episodic memory. Episodic memory is
autobiographical in nature, such as remembering riding a bicycle as a child around the neighborhood, as opposed to
the procedural memory of how to ride a bike. HM also retained his short-term memory, such as what is tested by
the three-word task described above. After a brief period, those memories would dissipate or decay and not be
stored in the long-term because the medial temporal lobe structures were removed.
The difference in short-term, procedural, and episodic memory, as evidenced by patient HM, suggests that there are
different parts of the brain responsible for those functions. The long-term storage of episodic memory requires the
hippocampus and related medial temporal structures, and the location of those memories is in the multimodal
integration areas of the cerebral cortex. However, short-term memory—also called working or active memory—is
localized to the prefrontal lobe. Because patient HM had only lost his medial temporal lobe—and lost very little of his
previous memories, and did not lose the ability to form new short-term memories—it was concluded that the
function of the hippocampus, and adjacent structures in the medial temporal lobe, is to move (or consolidate) short-
term memories (in the pre-frontal lobe) to long-term memory (in the temporal lobe).
The prefrontal cortex can also be tested for the ability to organize information. In one subtest of the mental status
exam called set generation, the patient is asked to generate a list of words that all start with the same letter, but not
to include proper nouns or names. The expectation is that a person can generate such a list of at least 10 words
within 1 minute. Many people can likely do this much more quickly, but the standard separates the accepted normal
from those with compromised prefrontal cortices.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/3word) to learn about a young man who texts his fiancée in a panic as he
finds that he is having trouble remembering things. At the hospital, a neurologist administers the mental status
exam, which is mostly normal except for the three-word recall test. The young man could not recall them even 30
seconds after hearing them and repeating them back to the doctor. An undiscovered mass in the mediastinum
region was found to be Hodgkin’s lymphoma, a type of cancer that affects the immune system and likely caused
antibodies to attack the nervous system. The patient eventually regained his ability to remember, though the events
in the hospital were always elusive. Considering that the effects on memory were temporary, but resulted in the loss
of the specific events of the hospital stay, what regions of the brain were likely to have been affected by the
antibodies and what type of memory does that represent?
Language and Speech
Language is, arguably, a very human aspect of neurological function. There are certainly strides being made in
understanding communication in other species, but much of what makes the human experience seemingly unique is
its basis in language. Any understanding of our species is necessarily reflective, as suggested by the question “What
am I?” And the fundamental answer to this question is suggested by the famous quote by René Descartes: “Cogito
Ergo Sum” (translated from Latin as “I think, therefore I am”). Formulating an understanding of yourself is largely
describing who you are to yourself. It is a confusing topic to delve into, but language is certainly at the core of what it
means to be self-aware.
The neurological exam has two specific subtests that address language. One measures the ability of the patient to
understand language by asking them to follow a set of instructions to perform an action, such as “touch your right
finger to your left elbow and then to your right knee.” Another subtest assesses the fluency and coherency of
language by having the patient generate descriptions of objects or scenes depicted in drawings, and by reciting
sentences or explaining a written passage. Language, however, is important in so many ways in the neurological
exam. The patient needs to know what to do, whether it is as simple as explaining how the knee-jerk reflex is going
632
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
to be performed, or asking a question such as “What is your name?” Often, language deficits can be determined
without specific subtests; if a person cannot reply to a question properly, there may be a problem with the reception
of language.
An important example of multimodal integrative areas is associated with language function (Figure 16.6). Adjacent
to the auditory association cortex, at the end of the lateral sulcus just anterior to the visual cortex, is Wernicke’s
area. In the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe, just anterior to the region of the motor cortex associated with the head
and neck, is Broca’s area. Both regions were originally described on the basis of losses of speech and language,
which is called aphasia. The aphasia associated with Broca’s area is known as an expressive aphasia, which means
that speech production is compromised. This type of aphasia is often described as non-fluency because the ability
to say some words leads to broken or halting speech. Grammar can also appear to be lost. The aphasia associated
with Wernicke’s area is known as a receptive aphasia, which is not a loss of speech production, but a loss of
understanding of content. Patients, after recovering from acute forms of this aphasia, report not being able to
understand what is said to them or what they are saying themselves, but they often cannot keep from talking.
The two regions are connected by white matter tracts that run between the posterior temporal lobe and the lateral
aspect of the frontal lobe. Conduction aphasia associated with damage to this connection refers to the problem of
connecting the understanding of language to the production of speech. This is a very rare condition, but is likely to
present as an inability to faithfully repeat spoken language.
FIGURE 16.6
Broca's and Wernicke's Areas
Two important integration areas of the cerebral cortex associated with language function
are Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. The two areas are connected through the deep white matter running from the posterior temporal lobe to
the frontal lobe.
Sensorium
Those parts of the brain involved in the reception and interpretation of sensory stimuli are referred to collectively as
the sensorium. The cerebral cortex has several regions that are necessary for sensory perception. From the primary
cortical areas of the somatosensory, visual, auditory, and gustatory senses to the association areas that process
information in these modalities, the cerebral cortex is the seat of conscious sensory perception. In contrast, sensory
information can also be processed by deeper brain regions, which we may vaguely describe as subconscious—for
instance, we are not constantly aware of the proprioceptive information that the cerebellum uses to maintain
balance. Several of the subtests can reveal activity associated with these sensory modalities, such as being able to
hear a question or see a picture. Two subtests assess specific functions of these cortical areas.
The first is praxis, a practical exercise in which the patient performs a task completely on the basis of verbal
description without any demonstration from the examiner. For example, the patient can be told to take their left
hand and place it palm down on their left thigh, then flip it over so the palm is facing up, and then repeat this four
times. The examiner describes the activity without any movements on their part to suggest how the movements are
to be performed. The patient needs to understand the instructions, transform them into movements, and use
sensory feedback, both visual and proprioceptive, to perform the movements correctly.
16.2 • The Mental Status Exam
633
The second subtest for sensory perception is gnosis, which involves two tasks. The first task, known as
stereognosis, involves the naming of objects strictly on the basis of the somatosensory information that comes from
manipulating them. The patient keeps their eyes closed and is given a common object, such as a coin, that they have
to identify. The patient should be able to indicate the particular type of coin, such as a dime versus a penny, or a
nickel versus a quarter, on the basis of the sensory cues involved. For example, the size, thickness, or weight of the
coin may be an indication, or to differentiate the pairs of coins suggested here, the smooth or corrugated edge of the
coin will correspond to the particular denomination. The second task, graphesthesia, is to recognize numbers or
letters written on the palm of the hand with a dull pointer, such as a pen cap.
Praxis and gnosis are related to the conscious perception and cortical processing of sensory information. Being able
to transform verbal commands into a sequence of motor responses, or to manipulate and recognize a common
object and associate it with a name for that object. Both subtests have language components because language
function is integral to these functions. The relationship between the words that describe actions, or the nouns that
represent objects, and the cerebral location of these concepts is suggested to be localized to particular cortical
areas. Certain aphasias can be characterized by a deficit of verbs or nouns, known as V impairment or N impairment,
or may be classified as V–N dissociation. Patients have difficulty using one type of word over the other. To describe
what is happening in a photograph as part of the expressive language subtest, a patient will use active- or image-
based language. The lack of one or the other of these components of language can relate to the ability to use verbs
or nouns. Damage to the region at which the frontal and temporal lobes meet, including the region known as the
insula, is associated with V impairment; damage to the middle and inferior temporal lobe is associated with N
impairment.
Judgment and Abstract Reasoning
Planning and producing responses requires an ability to make sense of the world around us. Making judgments and
reasoning in the abstract are necessary to produce movements as part of larger responses. For example, when your
alarm goes off, do you hit the snooze button or jump out of bed? Is 10 extra minutes in bed worth the extra rush to
get ready for your day? Will hitting the snooze button multiple times lead to feeling more rested or result in a panic
as you run late? How you mentally process these questions can affect your whole day.
The prefrontal cortex is responsible for the functions responsible for planning and making decisions. In the mental
status exam, the subtest that assesses judgment and reasoning is directed at three aspects of frontal lobe function.
First, the examiner asks questions about problem solving, such as “If you see a house on fire, what would you do?”
The patient is also asked to interpret common proverbs, such as “Don’t look a gift horse in the mouth.” Additionally,
pairs of words are compared for similarities, such as apple and orange, or lamp and cabinet.
The prefrontal cortex is composed of the regions of the frontal lobe that are not directly related to specific motor
functions. The most posterior region of the frontal lobe, the precentral gyrus, is the primary motor cortex. Anterior to
that are the premotor cortex, Broca’s area, and the frontal eye fields, which are all related to planning certain types
of movements. Anterior to what could be described as motor association areas are the regions of the prefrontal
cortex. They are the regions in which judgment, abstract reasoning, and working memory are localized. The
antecedents to planning certain movements are judging whether those movements should be made, as in the
example of deciding whether to hit the snooze button.
To an extent, the prefrontal cortex may be related to personality. The neurological exam does not necessarily assess
personality, but it can be within the realm of neurology or psychiatry. A clinical situation that suggests this link
between the prefrontal cortex and personality comes from the story of Phineas Gage, the railroad worker from the
mid-1800s who had a metal spike impale his prefrontal cortex. There are suggestions that the steel rod led to
changes in his personality. A man who was a quiet, dependable railroad worker became a raucous, irritable
drunkard. Later anecdotal evidence from his life suggests that he was able to support himself, although he had to
relocate and take on a different career as a stagecoach driver.
A psychiatric practice to deal with various disorders was the prefrontal lobotomy. This procedure was common in
the 1940s and early 1950s, until antipsychotic drugs became available. The connections between the prefrontal
cortex and other regions of the brain were severed. The disorders associated with this procedure included some
aspects of what are now referred to as personality disorders, but also included mood disorders and psychoses.
Depictions of lobotomies in popular media suggest a link between cutting the white matter of the prefrontal cortex
634
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
and changes in a patient’s mood and personality, though this correlation is not well understood.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch the video (http://openstax.org/l/2brains) titled “The Man With Two Brains” to see the neuroscientist Michael
Gazzaniga introduce a patient he has worked with for years who has had his corpus callosum cut, separating his two
cerebral hemispheres. A few tests are run to demonstrate how this manifests in tests of cerebral function. Unlike
normal people, this patient can perform two independent tasks at the same time because the lines of
communication between the right and left sides of his brain have been removed. Whereas a person with an intact
corpus callosum cannot overcome the dominance of one hemisphere over the other, this patient can. If the left
cerebral hemisphere is dominant in the majority of people, why would right-handedness be most common?
16.3 The Cranial Nerve Exam
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the functional grouping of cranial nerves
•
Match the regions of the forebrain and brain stem that are connected to each cranial nerve
•
Suggest diagnoses that would explain certain losses of function in the cranial nerves
•
Relate cranial nerve deficits to damage of adjacent, unrelated structures
The twelve cranial nerves are typically covered in introductory anatomy courses, and memorizing their names is
facilitated by numerous mnemonics developed by students over the years of this practice. But knowing the names
of the nerves in order often leaves much to be desired in understanding what the nerves do. The nerves can be
categorized by functions, and subtests of the cranial nerve exam can clarify these functional groupings.
Three of the nerves are strictly responsible for special senses whereas four others contain fibers for special and
general senses. Three nerves are connected to the extraocular muscles resulting in the control of gaze. Four nerves
Everyday Connection
Left Brain, Right Brain
Popular media often refer to right-brained and left-brained people, as if the brain were two independent halves
that work differently for different people. This is a popular misinterpretation of an important neurological
phenomenon. As an extreme measure to deal with a debilitating condition, the corpus callosum may be
sectioned to overcome intractable epilepsy. When the connections between the two cerebral hemispheres are
cut, interesting effects can be observed.
If a person with an intact corpus callosum is asked to put their hands in their pockets and describe what is there
on the basis of what their hands feel, they might say that they have keys in their right pocket and loose change in
the left. They may even be able to count the coins in their pocket and say if they can afford to buy a candy bar
from the vending machine. If a person with a sectioned corpus callosum is given the same instructions, they will
do something quite peculiar. They will only put their right hand in their pocket and say they have keys there.
They will not even move their left hand, much less report that there is loose change in the left pocket.
The reason for this is that the language functions of the cerebral cortex are localized to the left hemisphere in 95
percent of the population. Additionally, the left hemisphere is connected to the right side of the body through
the corticospinal tract and the ascending tracts of the spinal cord. Motor commands from the precentral gyrus
control the opposite side of the body, whereas sensory information processed by the postcentral gyrus is
received from the opposite side of the body. For a verbal command to initiate movement of the right arm and
hand, the left side of the brain needs to be connected by the corpus callosum. Language is processed in the left
side of the brain and directly influences the left brain and right arm motor functions, but is sent to influence the
right brain and left arm motor functions through the corpus callosum. Likewise, the left-handed sensory
perception of what is in the left pocket travels across the corpus callosum from the right brain, so no verbal
report on those contents would be possible if the hand happened to be in the pocket.
16.3 • The Cranial Nerve Exam
635
connect to muscles of the face, oral cavity, and pharynx, controlling facial expressions, mastication, swallowing, and
speech. Four nerves make up the cranial component of the parasympathetic nervous system responsible for
pupillary constriction, salivation, and the regulation of the organs of the thoracic and upper abdominal cavities.
Finally, one nerve controls the muscles of the neck, assisting with spinal control of the movement of the head and
neck.
The cranial nerve exam allows directed tests of forebrain and brain stem structures. The twelve cranial nerves serve
the head and neck. The vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) has autonomic functions in the thoracic and superior
abdominal cavities. The special senses are served through the cranial nerves, as well as the general senses of the
head and neck. The movement of the eyes, face, tongue, throat, and neck are all under the control of cranial nerves.
Preganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers that control pupillary size, salivary glands, and the thoracic and upper
abdominal viscera are found in four of the nerves. Tests of these functions can provide insight into damage to
specific regions of the brain stem and may uncover deficits in adjacent regions.
Sensory Nerves
The olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves (cranial nerves I, II, and VIII) are dedicated to four of the special
senses: smell, vision, equilibrium, and hearing, respectively. Taste sensation is relayed to the brain stem through
fibers of the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves. The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve that carries the general
somatic senses from the head, similar to those coming through spinal nerves from the rest of the body.
Testing smell is straightforward, as common smells are presented to one nostril at a time. The patient should be
able to recognize the smell of coffee or mint, indicating the proper functioning of the olfactory system. Loss of the
sense of smell is called anosmia and can be lost following blunt trauma to the head or through aging. The short
axons of the first cranial nerve regenerate on a regular basis. The neurons in the olfactory epithelium have a limited
life span, and new cells grow to replace the ones that die off. The axons from these neurons grow back into the CNS
by following the existing axons—representing one of the few examples of such growth in the mature nervous system.
If all of the fibers are sheared when the brain moves within the cranium, such as in a motor vehicle accident, then no
axons can find their way back to the olfactory bulb to re-establish connections. If the nerve is not completely
severed, the anosmia may be temporary as new neurons can eventually reconnect.
Olfaction is not the pre-eminent sense, but its loss can be quite detrimental. The enjoyment of food is largely based
on our sense of smell. Anosmia means that food will not seem to have the same taste, though the gustatory sense is
intact, and food will often be described as being bland. However, the taste of food can be improved by adding
ingredients (e.g., salt) that stimulate the gustatory sense.
Testing vision relies on the tests that are common in an optometry office. The Snellen chart (Figure 16.7)
demonstrates visual acuity by presenting standard Roman letters in a variety of sizes. The result of this test is a
rough generalization of the acuity of a person based on the normal accepted acuity, such that a letter that subtends
a visual angle of 5 minutes of an arc at 20 feet can be seen. To have 20/60 vision, for example, means that the
smallest letters that a person can see at a 20-foot distance could be seen by a person with normal acuity from 60
feet away. Testing the extent of the visual field means that the examiner can establish the boundaries of peripheral
vision as simply as holding their hands out to either side and asking the patient when the fingers are no longer
visible without moving the eyes to track them. If it is necessary, further tests can establish the perceptions in the
visual fields. Physical inspection of the optic disk, or where the optic nerve emerges from the eye, can be
accomplished by looking through the pupil with an ophthalmoscope.
636
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 16.7
The Snellen Chart
The Snellen chart for visual acuity presents a limited number of Roman letters in lines of decreasing
size. The line with letters that subtend 5 minutes of an arc from 20 feet represents the smallest letters that a person with normal acuity
should be able to read at that distance. The different sizes of letters in the other lines represent rough approximations of what a person of
normal acuity can read at different distances. For example, the line that represents 20/200 vision would have larger letters so that they are
legible to the person with normal acuity at 200 feet.
The optic nerves from both sides enter the cranium through the respective optic canals and meet at the optic
chiasm at which fibers sort such that the two halves of the visual field are processed by the opposite sides of the
brain. Deficits in visual field perception often suggest damage along the length of the optic pathway between the
orbit and the diencephalon. For example, loss of peripheral vision may be the result of a pituitary tumor pressing on
the optic chiasm (Figure 16.8). The pituitary, seated in the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone, is directly inferior to
the optic chiasm. The axons that decussate in the chiasm are from the medial retinae of either eye, and therefore
carry information from the peripheral visual field.
FIGURE 16.8
Pituitary Tumor
The pituitary gland is located in the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone within the cranial floor, placing it
immediately inferior to the optic chiasm. If the pituitary gland develops a tumor, it can press against the fibers crossing in the chiasm.
16.3 • The Cranial Nerve Exam
637
Those fibers are conveying peripheral visual information to the opposite side of the brain, so the patient will experience “tunnel
vision”—meaning that only the central visual field will be perceived.
The vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) carries both equilibrium and auditory sensations from the inner ear to the
medulla. Though the two senses are not directly related, anatomy is mirrored in the two systems. Problems with
balance, such as vertigo, and deficits in hearing may both point to problems with the inner ear. Within the petrous
region of the temporal bone is the bony labyrinth of the inner ear. The vestibule is the portion for equilibrium,
composed of the utricle, saccule, and the three semicircular canals. The cochlea is responsible for transducing
sound waves into a neural signal. The sensory nerves from these two structures travel side-by-side as the
vestibulocochlear nerve, though they are really separate divisions. They both emerge from the inner ear, pass
through the internal auditory meatus, and synapse in nuclei of the superior medulla. Though they are part of distinct
sensory systems, the vestibular nuclei and the cochlear nuclei are close neighbors with adjacent inputs. Deficits in
one or both systems could occur from damage that encompasses structures close to both. Damage to structures
near the two nuclei can result in deficits to one or both systems.
Balance or hearing deficits may be the result of damage to the middle or inner ear structures. Ménière's disease is a
disorder that can affect both equilibrium and audition in a variety of ways. The patient can suffer from vertigo, a low-
frequency ringing in the ears, or a loss of hearing. From patient to patient, the exact presentation of the disease can
be different. Additionally, within a single patient, the symptoms and signs may change as the disease progresses.
Use of the neurological exam subtests for the vestibulocochlear nerve illuminates the changes a patient may go
through. The disease appears to be the result of accumulation, or over-production, of fluid in the inner ear, in either
the vestibule or cochlea.
Tests of equilibrium are important for coordination and gait and are related to other aspects of the neurological
exam. The vestibulo-ocular reflex involves the cranial nerves for gaze control. Balance and equilibrium, as tested by
the Romberg test, are part of spinal and cerebellar processes and involved in those components of the neurological
exam, as discussed later.
Hearing is tested by using a tuning fork in a couple of different ways. The Rinne test involves using a tuning fork to
distinguish between conductive hearing and sensorineural hearing. Conductive hearing relies on vibrations being
conducted through the ossicles of the middle ear. Sensorineural hearing is the transmission of sound stimuli through
the neural components of the inner ear and cranial nerve. A vibrating tuning fork is placed on the mastoid process
and the patient indicates when the sound produced from this is no longer present. Then the fork is immediately
moved to just next to the ear canal so the sound travels through the air. If the sound is not heard through the ear,
meaning the sound is conducted better through the temporal bone than through the ossicles, a conductive hearing
deficit is present. The Weber test also uses a tuning fork to differentiate between conductive versus sensorineural
hearing loss. In this test, the tuning fork is placed at the top of the skull, and the sound of the tuning fork reaches
both inner ears by travelling through bone. In a healthy patient, the sound would appear equally loud in both ears.
With unilateral conductive hearing loss, however, the tuning fork sounds louder in the ear with hearing loss. This is
because the sound of the tuning fork has to compete with background noise coming from the outer ear, but in
conductive hearing loss, the background noise is blocked in the damaged ear, allowing the tuning fork to sound
relatively louder in that ear. With unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, however, damage to the cochlea or
associated nervous tissue means that the tuning fork sounds quieter in that ear.
The trigeminal system of the head and neck is the equivalent of the ascending spinal cord systems of the dorsal
column and the spinothalamic pathways. Somatosensation of the face is conveyed along the nerve to enter the brain
stem at the level of the pons. Synapses of those axons, however, are distributed across nuclei found throughout the
brain stem. The mesencephalic nucleus processes proprioceptive information of the face, which is the movement
and position of facial muscles. It is the sensory component of the jaw-jerk reflex, a stretch reflex of the masseter
muscle. The chief nucleus, located in the pons, receives information about light touch as well as proprioceptive
information about the mandible, which are both relayed to the thalamus and, ultimately, to the postcentral gyrus of
the parietal lobe. The spinal trigeminal nucleus, located in the medulla, receives information about crude touch,
pain, and temperature to be relayed to the thalamus and cortex. Essentially, the projection through the chief nucleus
is analogous to the dorsal column pathway for the body, and the projection through the spinal trigeminal nucleus is
analogous to the spinothalamic pathway.
Subtests for the sensory component of the trigeminal system are the same as those for the sensory exam targeting
638
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
the spinal nerves. The primary sensory subtest for the trigeminal system is sensory discrimination. A cotton-tipped
applicator, which is cotton attached to the end of a thin wooden stick, can be used easily for this. The wood of the
applicator can be snapped so that a pointed end is opposite the soft cotton-tipped end. The cotton end provides a
touch stimulus, while the pointed end provides a painful, or sharp, stimulus. While the patient’s eyes are closed, the
examiner touches the two ends of the applicator to the patient’s face, alternating randomly between them. The
patient must identify whether the stimulus is sharp or dull. These stimuli are processed by the trigeminal system
separately. Contact with the cotton tip of the applicator is a light touch, relayed by the chief nucleus, but contact
with the pointed end of the applicator is a painful stimulus relayed by the spinal trigeminal nucleus. Failure to
discriminate these stimuli can localize problems within the brain stem. If a patient cannot recognize a painful
stimulus, that might indicate damage to the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the medulla. The medulla also contains
important regions that regulate the cardiovascular, respiratory, and digestive systems, as well as being the pathway
for ascending and descending tracts between the brain and spinal cord. Damage, such as a stroke, that results in
changes in sensory discrimination may indicate these unrelated regions are affected as well.
Gaze Control
The three nerves that control the extraocular muscles are the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves, which
are the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves. As the name suggests, the abducens nerve is responsible for
abducting the eye, which it controls through contraction of the lateral rectus muscle. The trochlear nerve controls
the superior oblique muscle to rotate the eye along its axis in the orbit medially, which is called intorsion, and is a
component of focusing the eyes on an object close to the face. The oculomotor nerve controls all the other
extraocular muscles, as well as a muscle of the upper eyelid. Movements of the two eyes need to be coordinated to
locate and track visual stimuli accurately. When moving the eyes to locate an object in the horizontal plane, or to
track movement horizontally in the visual field, the lateral rectus muscle of one eye and medial rectus muscle of the
other eye are both active. The lateral rectus is controlled by neurons of the abducens nucleus in the superior
medulla, whereas the medial rectus is controlled by neurons in the oculomotor nucleus of the midbrain.
Coordinated movement of both eyes through different nuclei requires integrated processing through the brain stem.
In the midbrain, the superior colliculus integrates visual stimuli with motor responses to initiate eye movements.
The paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF) will initiate a rapid eye movement, or saccade, to bring the
eyes to bear on a visual stimulus quickly. These areas are connected to the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens
nuclei by the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) that runs through the majority of the brain stem. The MLF allows
for conjugate gaze, or the movement of the eyes in the same direction, during horizontal movements that require
the lateral and medial rectus muscles. Control of conjugate gaze strictly in the vertical direction is contained within
the oculomotor complex. To elevate the eyes, the oculomotor nerve on either side stimulates the contraction of both
superior rectus muscles; to depress the eyes, the oculomotor nerve on either side stimulates the contraction of both
inferior rectus muscles.
Purely vertical movements of the eyes are not very common. Movements are often at an angle, so some horizontal
components are necessary, adding the medial and lateral rectus muscles to the movement. The rapid movement of
the eyes used to locate and direct the fovea onto visual stimuli is called a saccade. Notice that the paths that are
traced in Figure 16.9 are not strictly vertical. The movements between the nose and the mouth are closest, but still
have a slant to them. Also, the superior and inferior rectus muscles are not perfectly oriented with the line of sight.
The origin for both muscles is medial to their insertions, so elevation and depression may require the lateral rectus
muscles to compensate for the slight adduction inherent in the contraction of those muscles, requiring MLF activity
as well.
16.3 • The Cranial Nerve Exam
639
FIGURE 16.9
Saccadic Eye Movements
Saccades are rapid, conjugate movements of the eyes to survey a complicated visual stimulus,
or to follow a moving visual stimulus. This image represents the shifts in gaze typical of a person studying a face. Notice the concentration
of gaze on the major features of the face and the large number of paths traced between the eyes or around the mouth.
Testing eye movement is simply a matter of having the patient track the tip of a pen as it is passed through the visual
field. This may appear similar to testing visual field deficits related to the optic nerve, but the difference is that the
patient is asked to not move the eyes while the examiner moves a stimulus into the peripheral visual field. Here, the
extent of movement is the point of the test. The examiner is watching for conjugate movements representing proper
function of the related nuclei and the MLF. Failure of one eye to abduct while the other adducts in a horizontal
movement is referred to as internuclear ophthalmoplegia. When this occurs, the patient will experience diplopia,
or double vision, as the two eyes are temporarily pointed at different stimuli. Diplopia is not restricted to failure of
the lateral rectus, because any of the extraocular muscles may fail to move one eye in perfect conjugation with the
other.
The final aspect of testing eye movements is to move the tip of the pen in toward the patient’s face. As visual stimuli
move closer to the face, the two medial recti muscles cause the eyes to move in the one nonconjugate movement
that is part of gaze control. When the two eyes move to look at something closer to the face, they both adduct, which
is referred to as convergence. To keep the stimulus in focus, the eye also needs to change the shape of the lens,
which is controlled through the parasympathetic fibers of the oculomotor nerve. The change in focal power of the
eye is referred to as accommodation. Accommodation ability changes with age; focusing on nearer objects, such as
the written text of a book or on a computer screen, may require corrective lenses later in life. Coordination of the
skeletal muscles for convergence and coordination of the smooth muscles of the ciliary body for accommodation are
referred to as the accommodation–convergence reflex.
A crucial function of the cranial nerves is to keep visual stimuli centered on the fovea of the retina. The vestibulo-
ocular reflex (VOR) coordinates all of the components (Figure 16.10), both sensory and motor, that make this
possible. If the head rotates in one direction—for example, to the right—the horizontal pair of semicircular canals in
the inner ear indicate the movement by increased activity on the right and decreased activity on the left. The
information is sent to the abducens nuclei and oculomotor nuclei on either side to coordinate the lateral and medial
rectus muscles. The left lateral rectus and right medial rectus muscles will contract, rotating the eyes in the
640
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
opposite direction of the head, while nuclei controlling the right lateral rectus and left medial rectus muscles will be
inhibited to reduce antagonism of the contracting muscles. These actions stabilize the visual field by compensating
for the head rotation with opposite rotation of the eyes in the orbits. Deficits in the VOR may be related to vestibular
damage, such as in Ménière’s disease, or from dorsal brain stem damage that would affect the eye movement nuclei
or their connections through the MLF.
FIGURE 16.10
Vestibulo-ocular Reflex
If the head is turned in one direction, the coordination of that movement with the fixation of the
eyes on a visual stimulus involves a circuit that ties the vestibular sense with the eye movement nuclei through the MLF.
Nerves of the Face and Oral Cavity
An iconic part of a doctor’s visit is the inspection of the oral cavity and pharynx, suggested by the directive to “open
your mouth and say ‘ah.’” This is followed by inspection, with the aid of a tongue depressor, of the back of the
mouth, or the opening of the oral cavity into the pharynx known as the fauces. Whereas this portion of a medical
exam inspects for signs of infection, such as in tonsillitis, it is also the means to test the functions of the cranial
nerves that are associated with the oral cavity.
The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves convey gustatory stimulation to the brain. Testing this is as simple as
introducing salty, sour, bitter, or sweet stimuli to either side of the tongue. The patient should respond to the taste
stimulus before retracting the tongue into the mouth. Stimuli applied to specific locations on the tongue will dissolve
into the saliva and may stimulate taste buds connected to either the left or right of the nerves, masking any lateral
deficits. Along with taste, the glossopharyngeal nerve relays general sensations from the pharyngeal walls. These
sensations, along with certain taste stimuli, can stimulate the gag reflex. If the examiner moves the tongue
depressor to contact the lateral wall of the fauces, this should elicit the gag reflex. Stimulation of either side of the
fauces should elicit an equivalent response. The motor response, through contraction of the muscles of the pharynx,
is mediated through the vagus nerve. Normally, the vagus nerve is considered autonomic in nature. The vagus nerve
directly stimulates the contraction of skeletal muscles in the pharynx and larynx to contribute to the swallowing and
speech functions. Further testing of vagus motor function has the patient repeating consonant sounds that require
16.3 • The Cranial Nerve Exam
641
movement of the muscles around the fauces. The patient is asked to say “lah-kah-pah” or a similar set of alternating
sounds while the examiner observes the movements of the soft palate and arches between the palate and tongue.
The facial and glossopharyngeal nerves are also responsible for the initiation of salivation. Neurons in the salivary
nuclei of the medulla project through these two nerves as preganglionic fibers, and synapse in ganglia located in the
head. The parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion, which projects to the
submandibular gland and sublingual gland. The parasympathetic fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve synapse in
the otic ganglion, which projects to the parotid gland. Salivation in response to food in the oral cavity is based on a
visceral reflex arc within the facial or glossopharyngeal nerves. Other stimuli that stimulate salivation are
coordinated through the hypothalamus, such as the smell and sight of food.
The hypoglossal nerve is the motor nerve that controls the muscles of the tongue, except for the palatoglossus
muscle, which is controlled by the vagus nerve. There are two sets of muscles of the tongue. The extrinsic muscles
of the tongue are connected to other structures, whereas the intrinsic muscles of the tongue are completely
contained within the lingual tissues. While examining the oral cavity, movement of the tongue will indicate whether
hypoglossal function is impaired. The test for hypoglossal function is the “stick out your tongue” part of the exam.
The genioglossus muscle is responsible for protrusion of the tongue. If the hypoglossal nerves on both sides are
working properly, then the tongue will stick straight out. If the nerve on one side has a deficit, the tongue will stick
out to that side—pointing to the side with damage. Loss of function of the tongue can interfere with speech and
swallowing. Additionally, because the location of the hypoglossal nerve and nucleus is near the cardiovascular
center, inspiratory and expiratory areas for respiration, and the vagus nuclei that regulate digestive functions, a
tongue that protrudes incorrectly can suggest damage in adjacent structures that have nothing to do with controlling
the tongue.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this short video (http://openstax.org/l/facialnerve) to see an examination of the facial nerve using some
simple tests. The facial nerve controls the muscles of facial expression. Severe deficits will be obvious in watching
someone use those muscles for normal control. One side of the face might not move like the other side. But directed
tests, especially for contraction against resistance, require a formal testing of the muscles. The muscles of the upper
and lower face need to be tested. The strength test in this video involves the patient squeezing her eyes shut and
the examiner trying to pry her eyes open. Why does the examiner ask her to try a second time?
Motor Nerves of the Neck
The accessory nerve, also referred to as the spinal accessory nerve, innervates the sternocleidomastoid and
trapezius muscles (Figure 16.11). When both the sternocleidomastoids contract, the head flexes forward;
individually, they cause rotation to the opposite side. The trapezius can act as an antagonist, causing extension and
hyperextension of the neck. These two superficial muscles are important for changing the position of the head. Both
muscles also receive input from cervical spinal nerves. Along with the spinal accessory nerve, these nerves
contribute to elevating the scapula and clavicle through the trapezius, which is tested by asking the patient to shrug
both shoulders, and watching for asymmetry. For the sternocleidomastoid, those spinal nerves are primarily sensory
projections, whereas the trapezius also has lateral insertions to the clavicle and scapula, and receives motor input
from the spinal cord. Calling the nerve the spinal accessory nerve suggests that it is aiding the spinal nerves. Though
that is not precisely how the name originated, it does help make the association between the function of this nerve
in controlling these muscles and the role these muscles play in movements of the trunk or shoulders.
642
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 16.11
Muscles Controlled by the Accessory Nerve
The accessory nerve innervates the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius
muscles, both of which attach to the head and to the trunk and shoulders. They can act as antagonists in head flexion and extension, and as
synergists in lateral flexion toward the shoulder.
To test these muscles, the patient is asked to flex and extend the neck or shrug the shoulders against resistance,
testing the strength of the muscles. Lateral flexion of the neck toward the shoulder tests both at the same time. Any
difference on one side versus the other would suggest damage on the weaker side. These strength tests are
common for the skeletal muscles controlled by spinal nerves and are a significant component of the motor exam.
Deficits associated with the accessory nerve may have an effect on orienting the head, as described with the VOR.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
The Pupillary Light Response
The autonomic control of pupillary size in response to a bright light involves the sensory input of the optic nerve and
the parasympathetic motor output of the oculomotor nerve. When light hits the retina, specialized photosensitive
ganglion cells send a signal along the optic nerve to the pretectal nucleus in the superior midbrain. A neuron from
this nucleus projects to the Edinger–Westphal nuclei in the oculomotor complex in both sides of the midbrain.
Neurons in this nucleus give rise to the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that project through the oculomotor
nerve to the ciliary ganglion in the posterior orbit. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the ganglion
project to the iris, where they release acetylcholine onto circular fibers that constrict the pupil to reduce the amount
of light hitting the retina. The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for dilating the pupil when light levels are
low.
Shining light in one eye will elicit constriction of both pupils. The efferent limb of the pupillary light reflex is bilateral.
Light shined in one eye causes a constriction of that pupil, as well as constriction of the contralateral pupil. Shining a
penlight in the eye of a patient is a very artificial situation, as both eyes are normally exposed to the same light
sources. Testing this reflex can illustrate whether the optic nerve or the oculomotor nerve is damaged. If shining the
light in one eye results in no changes in pupillary size but shining light in the opposite eye elicits a normal, bilateral
response, the damage is associated with the optic nerve on the nonresponsive side. If light in either eye elicits a
response in only one eye, the problem is with the oculomotor system.
If light in the right eye only causes the left pupil to constrict, the direct reflex is lost and the consensual reflex is
intact, which means that the right oculomotor nerve (or Edinger–Westphal nucleus) is damaged. Damage to the right
oculomotor connections will be evident when light is shined in the left eye. In that case, the direct reflex is intact but
the consensual reflex is lost, meaning that the left pupil will constrict while the right does not.
16.3 • The Cranial Nerve Exam
643
16.4 The Sensory and Motor Exams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the arrangement of sensory and motor regions in the spinal cord
•
Relate damage in the spinal cord to sensory or motor deficits
•
Differentiate between upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron diseases
•
Describe the clinical indications of common reflexes
Connections between the body and the CNS occur through the spinal cord. The cranial nerves connect the head and
neck directly to the brain, but the spinal cord receives sensory input and sends motor commands out to the body
through the spinal nerves. Whereas the brain develops into a complex series of nuclei and fiber tracts, the spinal
cord remains relatively simple in its configuration (Figure 16.12). From the initial neural tube early in embryonic
development, the spinal cord retains a tube-like structure with gray matter surrounding the small central canal and
white matter on the surface in three columns. The dorsal, or posterior, horns of the gray matter are mainly devoted
to sensory functions whereas the ventral, or anterior, and lateral horns are associated with motor functions. In the
white matter, the dorsal column relays sensory information to the brain, and the anterior column is almost
exclusively relaying motor commands to the ventral horn motor neurons. The lateral column, however, conveys both
sensory and motor information between the spinal cord and brain.
FIGURE 16.12
Locations of Spinal Fiber Tracts
Sensory Modalities and Location
The general senses are distributed throughout the body, relying on nervous tissue incorporated into various organs.
Somatic senses are incorporated mostly into the skin, muscles, or tendons, whereas the visceral senses come from
nervous tissue incorporated into the majority of organs such as the heart or stomach. The somatic senses are those
that usually make up the conscious perception of the how the body interacts with the environment. The visceral
senses are most often below the limit of conscious perception because they are involved in homeostatic regulation
through the autonomic nervous system.
644
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
The sensory exam tests the somatic senses, meaning those that are consciously perceived. Testing of the senses
begins with examining the regions known as dermatomes that connect to the cortical region where somatosensation
is perceived in the postcentral gyrus. To test the sensory fields, a simple stimulus of the light touch of the soft end of
a cotton-tipped applicator is applied at various locations on the skin. The spinal nerves, which contain sensory fibers
with dendritic endings in the skin, connect with the skin in a topographically organized manner, illustrated as
dermatomes (Figure 16.13). For example, the fibers of eighth cervical nerve innervate the medial surface of the
forearm and extend out to the fingers. In addition to testing perception at different positions on the skin, it is
necessary to test sensory perception within the dermatome from distal to proximal locations in the appendages, or
lateral to medial locations in the trunk. In testing the eighth cervical nerve, the patient would be asked if the touch
of the cotton to the fingers or the medial forearm was perceptible, and whether there were any differences in the
sensations.
FIGURE 16.13
Dermatomes
The surface of the skin can be divided into topographic regions that relate to the location of sensory
endings in the skin based on the spinal nerve that contains those fibers. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Other modalities of somatosensation can be tested using a few simple tools. The perception of pain can be tested
using the broken end of the cotton-tipped applicator. The perception of vibratory stimuli can be testing using an
oscillating tuning fork placed against prominent bone features such as the distal head of the ulna on the medial
aspect of the elbow. When the tuning fork is still, the metal against the skin can be perceived as a cold stimulus.
16.4 • The Sensory and Motor Exams
645
Using the cotton tip of the applicator, or even just a fingertip, the perception of tactile movement can be assessed as
the stimulus is drawn across the skin for approximately 2–3 cm. The patient would be asked in what direction the
stimulus is moving. All of these tests are repeated in distal and proximal locations and for different dermatomes to
assess the spatial specificity of perception. The sense of position and motion, proprioception, is tested by moving
the fingers or toes and asking the patient if they sense the movement. If the distal locations are not perceived, the
test is repeated at increasingly proximal joints.
The various stimuli used to test sensory input assess the function of the major ascending tracts of the spinal cord.
The dorsal column pathway conveys fine touch, vibration, and proprioceptive information, whereas the
spinothalamic pathway primarily conveys pain and temperature. Testing these stimuli provides information about
whether these two major ascending pathways are functioning properly. Within the spinal cord, the two systems are
segregated. The dorsal column information ascends ipsilateral to the source of the stimulus and decussates in the
medulla, whereas the spinothalamic pathway decussates at the level of entry and ascends contralaterally. The
differing sensory stimuli are segregated in the spinal cord so that the various subtests for these stimuli can
distinguish which ascending pathway may be damaged in certain situations.
Whereas the basic sensory stimuli are assessed in the subtests directed at each submodality of somatosensation,
testing the ability to discriminate sensations is important. Pairing the light touch and pain subtests together makes it
possible to compare the two submodalities at the same time, and therefore the two major ascending tracts at the
same time. Mistaking painful stimuli for light touch, or vice versa, may point to errors in ascending projections, such
as in a hemisection of the spinal cord that might come from a motor vehicle accident.
Another issue of sensory discrimination is not distinguishing between different submodalities, but rather location.
The two-point discrimination subtest highlights the density of sensory endings, and therefore receptive fields in the
skin. The sensitivity to fine touch, which can give indications of the texture and detailed shape of objects, is highest
in the fingertips. To assess the limit of this sensitivity, two-point discrimination is measured by simultaneously
touching the skin in two locations, such as could be accomplished with a pair of forceps. Specialized calipers for
precisely measuring the distance between points are also available. The patient is asked to indicate whether one or
two stimuli are present while keeping their eyes closed. The examiner will switch between using the two points and
a single point as the stimulus. Failure to recognize two points may be an indication of a dorsal column pathway
deficit.
Similar to two-point discrimination, but assessing laterality of perception, is double simultaneous stimulation. Two
stimuli, such as the cotton tips of two applicators, are touched to the same position on both sides of the body. If one
side is not perceived, this may indicate damage to the contralateral posterior parietal lobe. Because there is one of
each pathway on either side of the spinal cord, they are not likely to interact. If none of the other subtests suggest
particular deficits with the pathways, the deficit is likely to be in the cortex where conscious perception is based.
The mental status exam contains subtests that assess other functions that are primarily localized to the parietal
cortex, such as stereognosis and graphesthesia.
A final subtest of sensory perception that concentrates on the sense of proprioception is known as the Romberg
test. The patient is asked to stand straight with feet together. Once the patient has achieved their balance in that
position, they are asked to close their eyes. Without visual feedback that the body is in a vertical orientation relative
to the surrounding environment, the patient must rely on the proprioceptive stimuli of joint and muscle position, as
well as information from the inner ear, to maintain balance. This test can indicate deficits in dorsal column pathway
proprioception, as well as problems with proprioceptive projections to the cerebellum through the spinocerebellar
tract.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/2point) to see a quick demonstration of two-point discrimination. Touching a
specialized caliper to the surface of the skin will measure the distance between two points that are perceived as
distinct stimuli versus a single stimulus. The patient keeps their eyes closed while the examiner switches between
using both points of the caliper or just one. The patient then must indicate whether one or two stimuli are in contact
with the skin. Why is the distance between the caliper points closer on the fingertips as opposed to the palm of the
hand? And what do you think the distance would be on the arm, or the shoulder?
646
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
Muscle Strength and Voluntary Movement
The skeletomotor system is largely based on the simple, two-cell projection from the precentral gyrus of the frontal
lobe to the skeletal muscles. The corticospinal tract represents the neurons that send output from the primary
motor cortex. These fibers travel through the deep white matter of the cerebrum, then through the midbrain and
pons, into the medulla where most of them decussate, and finally through the spinal cord white matter in the lateral
(crossed fibers) or anterior (uncrossed fibers) columns. These fibers synapse on motor neurons in the ventral horn.
The ventral horn motor neurons then project to skeletal muscle and cause contraction. These two cells are termed
the upper motor neuron (UMN) and the lower motor neuron (LMN). Voluntary movements require these two cells to
be active.
The motor exam tests the function of these neurons and the muscles they control. First, the muscles are inspected
and palpated for signs of structural irregularities. Movement disorders may be the result of changes to the muscle
tissue, such as scarring, and these possibilities need to be ruled out before testing function. Along with this
inspection, muscle tone is assessed by moving the muscles through a passive range of motion. The arm is moved at
the elbow and wrist, and the leg is moved at the knee and ankle. Skeletal muscle should have a resting tension
representing a slight contraction of the fibers. The lack of muscle tone, known as hypotonicity or flaccidity, may
indicate that the LMN is not conducting action potentials that will keep a basal level of acetylcholine in the
neuromuscular junction.
If muscle tone is present, muscle strength is tested by having the patient contract muscles against resistance. The
examiner will ask the patient to lift the arm, for example, while the examiner is pushing down on it. This is done for
both limbs, including shrugging the shoulders. Lateral differences in strength—being able to push against resistance
with the right arm but not the left—would indicate a deficit in one corticospinal tract versus the other. An overall loss
of strength, without laterality, could indicate a global problem with the motor system. Diseases that result in UMN
lesions include cerebral palsy or MS, or it may be the result of a stroke. A sign of UMN lesion is a negative result in
the subtest for pronator drift. The patient is asked to extend both arms in front of the body with the palms facing
up. While keeping the eyes closed, if the patient unconsciously allows one or the other arm to slowly relax, toward
the pronated position, this could indicate a failure of the motor system to maintain the supinated position.
Reflexes
Reflexes combine the spinal sensory and motor components with a sensory input that directly generates a motor
response. The reflexes that are tested in the neurological exam are classified into two groups. A deep tendon reflex
is commonly known as a stretch reflex, and is elicited by a strong tap to a tendon, such as in the knee-jerk reflex. A
superficial reflex is elicited through gentle stimulation of the skin and causes contraction of the associated
muscles.
For the arm, the common reflexes to test are of the biceps, brachioradialis, triceps, and flexors for the digits. For the
leg, the knee-jerk reflex of the quadriceps is common, as is the ankle reflex for the gastrocnemius and soleus. The
tendon at the insertion for each of these muscles is struck with a rubber mallet. The muscle is quickly stretched,
resulting in activation of the muscle spindle that sends a signal into the spinal cord through the dorsal root. The fiber
synapses directly on the ventral horn motor neuron that activates the muscle, causing contraction. The reflexes are
physiologically useful for stability. If a muscle is stretched, it reflexively contracts to return the muscle to
compensate for the change in length. In the context of the neurological exam, reflexes indicate that the LMN is
functioning properly.
The most common superficial reflex in the neurological exam is the plantar reflex that tests for the Babinski sign
on the basis of the extension or flexion of the toes at the plantar surface of the foot. The plantar reflex is commonly
tested in newborn infants to establish the presence of neuromuscular function. To elicit this reflex, an examiner
brushes a stimulus, usually the examiner’s fingertip, along the plantar surface of the infant’s foot. An infant would
present a positive Babinski sign, meaning the foot dorsiflexes and the toes extend and splay out. As a person learns
to walk, the plantar reflex changes to cause curling of the toes and a moderate plantar flexion. If superficial
stimulation of the sole of the foot caused extension of the foot, keeping one’s balance would be harder. The
descending input of the corticospinal tract modifies the response of the plantar reflex, meaning that a negative
Babinski sign is the expected response in testing the reflex. Other superficial reflexes are not commonly tested,
though a series of abdominal reflexes can target function in the lower thoracic spinal segments.
16.4 • The Sensory and Motor Exams
647
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/reflextest) to see how to test reflexes in the abdomen. Testing reflexes of the
trunk is not commonly performed in the neurological exam, but if findings suggest a problem with the thoracic
segments of the spinal cord, a series of superficial reflexes of the abdomen can localize function to those segments.
If contraction is not observed when the skin lateral to the umbilicus (belly button) is stimulated, what level of the
spinal cord may be damaged?
Comparison of Upper and Lower Motor Neuron Damage
Many of the tests of motor function can indicate differences that will address whether damage to the motor system
is in the upper or lower motor neurons. Signs that suggest a UMN lesion include muscle weakness, strong deep
tendon reflexes, decreased control of movement or slowness, pronator drift, a positive Babinski sign, spasticity, and
the clasp-knife response. Spasticity is an excess contraction in resistance to stretch. It can result in hyperflexia,
which is when joints are overly flexed. The clasp-knife response occurs when the patient initially resists movement,
but then releases, and the joint will quickly flex like a pocket knife closing.
A lesion on the LMN would result in paralysis, or at least partial loss of voluntary muscle control, which is known as
paresis. The paralysis observed in LMN diseases is referred to as flaccid paralysis, referring to a complete or partial
loss of muscle tone, in contrast to the loss of control in UMN lesions in which tone is retained and spasticity is
exhibited. Other signs of an LMN lesion are fibrillation, fasciculation, and compromised or lost reflexes resulting
from the denervation of the muscle fibers.
Disorders of the...
Spinal Cord
In certain situations, such as a motorcycle accident, only half of the spinal cord may be damaged in what is
known as a hemisection. Forceful trauma to the trunk may cause ribs or vertebrae to fracture, and debris can
crush or section through part of the spinal cord. The full section of a spinal cord would result in paraplegia, or
loss of voluntary motor control of the lower body, as well as loss of sensations from that point down. A
hemisection, however, will leave spinal cord tracts intact on one side. The resulting condition would be
hemiplegia on the side of the trauma—one leg would be paralyzed. The sensory results are more complicated.
The ascending tracts in the spinal cord are segregated between the dorsal column and spinothalamic pathways.
This means that the sensory deficits will be based on the particular sensory information each pathway conveys.
Sensory discrimination between touch and painful stimuli will illustrate the difference in how these pathways
divide these functions.
On the paralyzed leg, a patient will acknowledge painful stimuli, but not fine touch or proprioceptive sensations.
On the functional leg, the opposite is true. The reason for this is that the dorsal column pathway ascends
ipsilateral to the sensation, so it would be damaged the same way as the lateral corticospinal tract. The
spinothalamic pathway decussates immediately upon entering the spinal cord and ascends contralateral to the
source; it would therefore bypass the hemisection.
The motor system can indicate the loss of input to the ventral horn in the lumbar enlargement where motor
neurons to the leg are found, but motor function in the trunk is less clear. The left and right anterior corticospinal
tracts are directly adjacent to each other. The likelihood of trauma to the spinal cord resulting in a hemisection
that affects one anterior column, but not the other, is very unlikely. Either the axial musculature will not be
affected at all, or there will be bilateral losses in the trunk.
Sensory discrimination can pinpoint the level of damage in the spinal cord. Below the hemisection, pain stimuli
will be perceived in the damaged side, but not fine touch. The opposite is true on the other side. The pain fibers
on the side with motor function cross the midline in the spinal cord and ascend in the contralateral lateral
column as far as the hemisection. The dorsal column will be intact ipsilateral to the source on the intact side and
reach the brain for conscious perception. The trauma would be at the level just before sensory discrimination
returns to normal, helping to pinpoint the trauma. Whereas imaging technology, like magnetic resonance
648
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
16.5 The Coordination and Gait Exams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the relationship between the location of the cerebellum and its function in movement
•
Chart the major divisions of the cerebellum
•
List the major connections of the cerebellum
•
Describe the relationship of the cerebellum to axial and appendicular musculature
•
Explain the prevalent causes of cerebellar ataxia
The role of the cerebellum is a subject of debate. There is an obvious connection to motor function based on the
clinical implications of cerebellar damage. There is also strong evidence of the cerebellar role in procedural memory.
The two are not incompatible; in fact, procedural memory is motor memory, such as learning to ride a bicycle.
Significant work has been performed to describe the connections within the cerebellum that result in learning. A
model for this learning is classical conditioning, as shown by the famous dogs from the physiologist Ivan Pavlov’s
work. This classical conditioning, which can be related to motor learning, fits with the neural connections of the
cerebellum. The cerebellum is 10 percent of the mass of the brain and has varied functions that all point to a role in
the motor system.
Location and Connections of the Cerebellum
The cerebellum is located in apposition to the dorsal surface of the brain stem, centered on the pons. The name of
the pons is derived from its connection to the cerebellum. The word means “bridge” and refers to the thick bundle of
myelinated axons that form a bulge on its ventral surface. Those fibers are axons that project from the gray matter of
the pons into the contralateral cerebellar cortex. These fibers make up the middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP) and
are the major physical connection of the cerebellum to the brain stem (Figure 16.14). Two other white matter
bundles connect the cerebellum to the other regions of the brain stem. The superior cerebellar peduncle (SCP) is
the connection of the cerebellum to the midbrain and forebrain. The inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP) is the
connection to the medulla.
FIGURE 16.14
Cerebellar Peduncles
The connections to the cerebellum are the three cerebellar peduncles, which are close to each
other. The ICP arises from the medulla—specifically from the inferior olive, which is visible as a bulge on the ventral surface of the brain
stem. The MCP is the ventral surface of the pons. The SCP projects into the midbrain.
These connections can also be broadly described by their functions. The ICP conveys sensory input to the
imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scanning, could localize the injury as well, nothing more
complicated than a cotton-tipped applicator can localize the damage. That may be all that is available on the
scene when moving the victim requires crucial decisions be made.
16.5 • The Coordination and Gait Exams
649
cerebellum, partially from the spinocerebellar tract, but also through fibers of the inferior olive. The MCP is part of
the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway that connects the cerebral cortex with the cerebellum and preferentially
targets the lateral regions of the cerebellum. It includes a copy of the motor commands sent from the precentral
gyrus through the corticospinal tract, arising from collateral branches that synapse in the gray matter of the pons,
along with input from other regions such as the visual cortex. The SCP is the major output of the cerebellum, divided
between the red nucleus in the midbrain and the thalamus, which will return cerebellar processing to the motor
cortex. These connections describe a circuit that compares motor commands and sensory feedback to generate a
new output. These comparisons make it possible to coordinate movements. If the cerebral cortex sends a motor
command to initiate walking, that command is copied by the pons and sent into the cerebellum through the MCP.
Sensory feedback in the form of proprioception from the spinal cord, as well as vestibular sensations from the inner
ear, enters through the ICP. If you take a step and begin to slip on the floor because it is wet, the output from the
cerebellum—through the SCP—can correct for that and keep you balanced and moving. The red nucleus sends new
motor commands to the spinal cord through the rubrospinal tract.
The cerebellum is divided into regions that are based on the particular functions and connections involved. The
midline regions of the cerebellum, the vermis and flocculonodular lobe, are involved in comparing visual
information, equilibrium, and proprioceptive feedback to maintain balance and coordinate movements such as
walking, or gait, through the descending output of the red nucleus (Figure 16.15). The lateral hemispheres are
primarily concerned with planning motor functions through frontal lobe inputs that are returned through the
thalamic projections back to the premotor and motor cortices. Processing in the midline regions targets movements
of the axial musculature, whereas the lateral regions target movements of the appendicular musculature. The
vermis is referred to as the spinocerebellum because it primarily receives input from the dorsal columns and
spinocerebellar pathways. The flocculonodular lobe is referred to as the vestibulocerebellum because of the
vestibular projection into that region. Finally, the lateral cerebellum is referred to as the cerebrocerebellum,
reflecting the significant input from the cerebral cortex through the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway.
FIGURE 16.15
Major Regions of the Cerebellum
The cerebellum can be divided into two basic regions: the midline and the
hemispheres. The midline is composed of the vermis and the flocculonodular lobe, and the hemispheres are the lateral regions.
Coordination and Alternating Movement
Testing for cerebellar function is the basis of the coordination exam. The subtests target appendicular musculature,
controlling the limbs, and axial musculature for posture and gait. The assessment of cerebellar function will depend
on the normal functioning of other systems addressed in previous sections of the neurological exam. Motor control
from the cerebrum, as well as sensory input from somatic, visual, and vestibular senses, are important to cerebellar
function.
The subtests that address appendicular musculature, and therefore the lateral regions of the cerebellum, begin with
a check for tremor. The patient extends their arms in front of them and holds the position. The examiner watches for
the presence of tremors that would not be present if the muscles are relaxed. By pushing down on the arms in this
position, the examiner can check for the rebound response, which is when the arms are automatically brought back
650
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
to the extended position. The extension of the arms is an ongoing motor process, and the tap or push on the arms
presents a change in the proprioceptive feedback. The cerebellum compares the cerebral motor command with the
proprioceptive feedback and adjusts the descending input to correct. The red nucleus would send an additional
signal to the LMN for the arm to increase contraction momentarily to overcome the change and regain the original
position.
The check reflex depends on cerebellar input to keep increased contraction from continuing after the removal of
resistance. The patient flexes the elbow against resistance from the examiner to extend the elbow. When the
examiner releases the arm, the patient should be able to stop the increased contraction and keep the arm from
moving. A similar response would be seen if you try to pick up a coffee mug that you believe to be full but turns out
to be empty. Without checking the contraction, the mug would be thrown from the overexertion of the muscles
expecting to lift a heavier object.
Several subtests of the cerebellum assess the ability to alternate movements, or switch between muscle groups that
may be antagonistic to each other. In the finger-to-nose test, the patient touches their finger to the examiner’s
finger and then to their nose, and then back to the examiner’s finger, and back to the nose. The examiner moves the
target finger to assess a range of movements. A similar test for the lower extremities has the patient touch their toe
to a moving target, such as the examiner’s finger. Both of these tests involve flexion and extension around a
joint—the elbow or the knee and the shoulder or hip—as well as movements of the wrist and ankle. The patient must
switch between the opposing muscles, like the biceps and triceps brachii, to move their finger from the target to
their nose. Coordinating these movements involves the motor cortex communicating with the cerebellum through
the pons and feedback through the thalamus to plan the movements. Visual cortex information is also part of the
processing that occurs in the cerebrocerebellum while it is involved in guiding movements of the finger or toe.
Rapid, alternating movements are tested for the upper and lower extremities. The patient is asked to touch each
finger to their thumb, or to pat the palm of one hand on the back of the other, and then flip that hand over and
alternate back-and-forth. To test similar function in the lower extremities, the patient touches their heel to their shin
near the knee and slides it down toward the ankle, and then back again, repetitively. Rapid, alternating movements
are part of speech as well. A patient is asked to repeat the nonsense consonants “lah-kah-pah” to alternate
movements of the tongue, lips, and palate. All of these rapid alternations require planning from the
cerebrocerebellum to coordinate movement commands that control the coordination.
Posture and Gait
Gait can either be considered a separate part of the neurological exam or a subtest of the coordination exam that
addresses walking and balance. Testing posture and gait addresses functions of the spinocerebellum and the
vestibulocerebellum because both are part of these activities. A subtest called station begins with the patient
standing in a normal position to check for the placement of the feet and balance. The patient is asked to hop on one
foot to assess the ability to maintain balance and posture during movement. Though the station subtest appears to
be similar to the Romberg test, the difference is that the patient’s eyes are open during station. The Romberg test
has the patient stand still with the eyes closed. Any changes in posture would be the result of proprioceptive
deficits, and the patient is able to recover when they open their eyes.
Subtests of walking begin with having the patient walk normally for a distance away from the examiner, and then
turn and return to the starting position. The examiner watches for abnormal placement of the feet and the
movement of the arms relative to the movement. The patient is then asked to walk with a few different variations.
Tandem gait is when the patient places the heel of one foot against the toe of the other foot and walks in a straight
line in that manner. Walking only on the heels or only on the toes will test additional aspects of balance.
Ataxia
A movement disorder of the cerebellum is referred to as ataxia. It presents as a loss of coordination in voluntary
movements. Ataxia can also refer to sensory deficits that cause balance problems, primarily in proprioception and
equilibrium. When the problem is observed in movement, it is ascribed to cerebellar damage. Sensory and vestibular
ataxia would likely also present with problems in gait and station.
Ataxia is often the result of exposure to exogenous substances, focal lesions, or a genetic disorder. Focal lesions
include strokes affecting the cerebellar arteries, tumors that may impinge on the cerebellum, trauma to the back of
16.5 • The Coordination and Gait Exams
651
the head and neck, or MS. Alcohol intoxication or drugs such as ketamine cause ataxia, but it is often reversible.
Mercury in fish can cause ataxia as well. Hereditary conditions can lead to degeneration of the cerebellum or spinal
cord, as well as malformation of the brain, or the abnormal accumulation of copper seen in Wilson’s disease.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this short video (http://openstax.org/l/stationtest) to see a test for station. Station refers to the position a
person adopts when they are standing still. The examiner would look for issues with balance, which coordinates
proprioceptive, vestibular, and visual information in the cerebellum. To test the ability of a subject to maintain
balance, asking them to stand or hop on one foot can be more demanding. The examiner may also push the subject
to see if they can maintain balance. An abnormal finding in the test of station is if the feet are placed far apart. Why
would a wide stance suggest problems with cerebellar function?
Everyday Connection
The Field Sobriety Test
The neurological exam has been described as a clinical tool throughout this chapter. It is also useful in other
ways. A variation of the coordination exam is the Field Sobriety Test (FST) used to assess whether drivers are
under the influence of alcohol. The cerebellum is crucial for coordinated movements such as keeping balance
while walking, or moving appendicular musculature on the basis of proprioceptive feedback. The cerebellum is
also very sensitive to ethanol, the particular type of alcohol found in beer, wine, and liquor.
Walking in a straight line involves comparing the motor command from the primary motor cortex to the
proprioceptive and vestibular sensory feedback, as well as following the visual guide of the white line on the side
of the road. When the cerebellum is compromised by alcohol, the cerebellum cannot coordinate these
movements effectively, and maintaining balance becomes difficult.
Another common aspect of the FST is to have the driver extend their arms out wide and touch their fingertip to
their nose, usually with their eyes closed. The point of this is to remove the visual feedback for the movement
and force the driver to rely just on proprioceptive information about the movement and position of their fingertip
relative to their nose. With eyes open, the corrections to the movement of the arm might be so small as to be
hard to see, but proprioceptive feedback is not as immediate and broader movements of the arm will probably
be needed, particularly if the cerebellum is affected by alcohol.
Reciting the alphabet backwards is not always a component of the FST, but its relationship to neurological
function is interesting. There is a cognitive aspect to remembering how the alphabet goes and how to recite it
backwards. That is actually a variation of the mental status subtest of repeating the months backwards.
However, the cerebellum is important because speech production is a coordinated activity. The speech rapid
alternating movement subtest is specifically using the consonant changes of “lah-kah-pah” to assess
coordinated movements of the lips, tongue, pharynx, and palate. But the entire alphabet, especially in the
nonrehearsed backwards order, pushes this type of coordinated movement quite far. It is related to the reason
that speech becomes slurred when a person is intoxicated.
652
16 • The Neurological Exam
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
accommodation
in vision, a change in the ability of
the eye to focus on objects at different distances
accommodation–convergence reflex
coordination of
somatic control of the medial rectus muscles of
either eye with the parasympathetic control of the
ciliary bodies to maintain focus while the eyes
converge on visual stimuli near to the face
anterograde amnesia
inability to form new memories
from a particular time forward
aphasia
loss of language function
ataxia
movement disorder related to damage of the
cerebellum characterized by loss of coordination in
voluntary movements
Babinski sign
dorsiflexion of the foot with extension
and splaying of the toes in response to the plantar
reflex, normally suppressed by corticospinal input
cerebrocerebellum
lateral regions of the cerebellum;
named for the significant input from the cerebral
cortex
check reflex
response to a release in resistance so
that the contractions stop, or check, movement
clasp-knife response
sign of UMN disease when a
patient initially resists passive movement of a
muscle but will quickly release to a lower state of
resistance
conduction aphasia
loss of language function related
to connecting the understanding of speech with the
production of speech, without either specific
function being lost
conductive hearing
hearing dependent on the
conduction of vibrations of the tympanic membrane
through the ossicles of the middle ear
conjugate gaze
coordinated movement of the two
eyes simultaneously in the same direction
convergence
in vision, the movement of the eyes so
that they are both pointed at the same point in
space, which increases for stimuli that are closer to
the subject
coordination exam
major section of the neurological
exam that assesses complex, coordinated motor
functions of the cerebellum and associated motor
pathways
cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway
projection from
the cerebral cortex to the cerebellum by way of the
gray matter of the pons
cranial nerve exam
major section of the neurological
exam that assesses sensory and motor functions of
the cranial nerves and their associated central and
peripheral structures
cytoarchitecture
study of a tissue based on the
structure and organization of its cellular
components; related to the broader term, histology
deep tendon reflex
another term for stretch reflex,
based on the elicitation through deep stimulation of
the tendon at the insertion
diplopia
double vision resulting from a failure in
conjugate gaze
edema
fluid accumulation in tissue; often associated
with circulatory deficits
embolus
obstruction in a blood vessel such as a
blood clot, fatty mass, air bubble, or other foreign
matter that interrupts the flow of blood to an organ
or some part of the body
episodic memory
memory of specific events in an
autobiographical sense
expressive aphasia
loss of the ability to produce
language; usually associated with damage to
Broca’s area in the frontal lobe
extrinsic muscles of the tongue
muscles that are
connected to other structures, such as the hyoid
bone or the mandible, and control the position of
the tongue
fasciculation
small muscle twitch as a result of
spontaneous activity from an LMN
fauces
opening from the oral cavity into the pharynx
fibrillation
in motor responses, a spontaneous
muscle action potential that occurs in the absence
of neuromuscular input, resulting from LMN lesions
flaccid paralysis
loss of voluntary muscle control and
muscle tone, as the result of LMN disease
flaccidity
presentation of a loss of muscle tone,
observed as floppy limbs or a lack of resistance to
passive movement
flocculonodular lobe
lobe of the cerebellum that
receives input from the vestibular system to help
with balance and posture
gait
rhythmic pattern of alternating movements of the
lower limbs during locomotion
gait exam
major section of the neurological exam
that assesses the cerebellum and descending
pathways in the spinal cord through the coordinated
motor functions of walking; a portion of the
coordination exam
gnosis
in a neurological exam, intuitive experiential
knowledge tested by interacting with common
objects or symbols
graphesthesia
perception of symbols, such as letters
or numbers, traced in the palm of the hand
hemisection
cut through half of a structure, such as
the spinal cord
hemorrhagic stroke
disruption of blood flow to the
brain caused by bleeding within the cranial vault
hyperflexia
overly flexed joints
hypotonicity
low muscle tone, a sign of LMN disease
16 • Key Terms
653
hypovolemia
decrease in blood volume
inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP)
input to the
cerebellum, largely from the inferior olive, that
represents sensory feedback from the periphery
inferior olive
large nucleus in the medulla that
receives input from sensory systems and projects
into the cerebellar cortex
internuclear ophthalmoplegia
deficit of conjugate
lateral gaze because the lateral rectus muscle of
one eye does not contract resulting from damage to
the abducens nerve or the MLF
intorsion
medial rotation of the eye around its axis
intrinsic muscles of the tongue
muscles that
originate out of, and insert into, other tissues within
the tongue and control the shape of the tongue
ischemic stroke
disruption of blood flow to the brain
because blood cannot flow through blood vessels as
a result of a blockage or narrowing of the vessel
jaw-jerk reflex
stretch reflex of the masseter muscle
localization of function
principle that circumscribed
anatomical locations are responsible for specific
functions in an organ system
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF)
fiber pathway
that connects structures involved in the control of
eye and head position, from the superior colliculus
to the vestibular nuclei and cerebellum
mental status exam
major section of the
neurological exam that assesses cognitive functions
of the cerebrum
middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP)
large, white-
matter bridge from the pons that constitutes the
major input to the cerebellar cortex
motor exam
major section of the neurological exam
that assesses motor functions of the spinal cord and
spinal nerves
neurological exam
clinical assessment tool that can
be used to quickly evaluate neurological function
and determine if specific parts of the nervous
system have been affected by damage or disease
paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF)
region of the brain stem adjacent to the motor
nuclei for gaze control that coordinates rapid,
conjugate eye movements
paresis
partial loss of, or impaired, voluntary muscle
control
plantar reflex
superficial reflex initiated by gentle
stimulation of the sole of the foot
praxis
in a neurological exam, the act of doing
something using ready knowledge or skills in
response to verbal instruction
procedural memory
memory of how to perform a
specific task
pronator drift
sign of contralateral corticospinal
lesion when the one arm will drift into a pronated
position when held straight out with the palms
facing upward
receptive aphasia
loss of the ability to understand
received language, such as what is spoken to the
subject or given in written form
red nucleus
nucleus in the midbrain that receives
output from the cerebellum and projects onto the
spinal cord in the rubrospinal tract
retrograde amnesia
loss of memories before a
particular event
Rinne test
use of a tuning fork to test conductive
hearing loss versus sensorineural hearing loss
Romberg test
test of equilibrium that requires the
patient to maintain a straight, upright posture
without visual feedback of position
rubrospinal tract
descending tract from the red
nucleus of the midbrain that results in modification
of ongoing motor programs
saccade
small, rapid movement of the eyes used to
locate and direct the fovea onto visual stimuli
sensorineural hearing
hearing dependent on the
transduction and propagation of auditory
information through the neural components of the
peripheral auditory structures
sensory exam
major section of the neurological exam
that assesses sensory functions of the spinal cord
and spinal nerves
short-term memory
capacity to retain information
actively in the brain for a brief period of time
Snellen chart
standardized arrangement of letters in
decreasing size presented to a subject at a distance
of 20 feet to test visual acuity
spasticity
increased contraction of a muscle in
response to resistance, often resulting in hyperflexia
spinocerebellar tract
ascending fibers that carry
proprioceptive input to the cerebellum used in
maintaining balance and coordinated movement
spinocerebellum
midline region of the cerebellum
known as the vermis that receives proprioceptive
input from the spinal cord
stereognosis
perception of common objects placed
in the hand solely on the basis of manipulation of
that object in the hand
stroke
(also, cerebrovascular accident (CVA)) loss of
neurological function caused by an interruption of
blood flow to a region of the central nervous system
superficial reflex
reflexive contraction initiated by
gentle stimulation of the skin
superior cerebellar peduncle (SCP)
white-matter
tract representing output of the cerebellum to the
red nucleus of the midbrain
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
temporary
654
16 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
disruption of blood flow to the brain in which
symptoms occur rapidly but last only a short time
vermis
prominent ridge along the midline of the
cerebellum that is referred to as the
spinocerebellum
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR)
reflex based on
connections between the vestibular system and the
cranial nerves of eye movements that ensures that
images are stabilized on the retina as the head and
body move
vestibulocerebellum
flocculonodular lobe of the
cerebellum named for the vestibular input from the
eighth cranial nerve
Weber test
use of a tuning fork to test the laterality of
hearing loss by placing it at several locations on the
midline of the skull
Wernicke’s area
region at the posterior end of the
lateral sulcus in which speech comprehension is
localized
Chapter Review
16.1 Overview of the Neurological Exam
The neurological exam is a clinical assessment tool to
determine the extent of function from the nervous
system. It is divided into five major sections that each
deal with a specific region of the CNS. The mental
status exam is concerned with the cerebrum and
assesses higher functions such as memory, language,
and emotion. The cranial nerve exam tests the
functions of all of the cranial nerves and, therefore,
their connections to the CNS through the forebrain and
brain stem. The sensory and motor exams assess those
functions as they relate to the spinal cord, as well as
the combination of the functions in spinal reflexes. The
coordination exam targets cerebellar function in
coordinated movements, including those functions
associated with gait.
Damage to and disease of the nervous system lead to
loss of function. The location of the injury will
correspond to the functional loss, as suggested by the
principle of localization of function. The neurological
exam provides the opportunity for a clinician to
determine where damage has occurred on the basis of
the function that is lost. Damage from acute injuries
such as strokes may result in specific functions being
lost, whereas broader effects in infection or
developmental disorders may result in general losses
across an entire section of the neurological exam.
16.2 The Mental Status Exam
The cerebrum, particularly the cerebral cortex, is the
location of important cognitive functions that are the
focus of the mental status exam. The regionalization of
the cortex, initially described on the basis of
anatomical evidence of cytoarchitecture, reveals the
distribution of functionally distinct areas. Cortical
regions can be described as primary sensory or motor
areas, association areas, or multimodal integration
areas. The functions attributed to these regions include
attention, memory, language, speech, sensation,
judgment, and abstract reasoning.
The mental status exam addresses these cognitive
abilities through a series of subtests designed to elicit
particular behaviors ascribed to these functions. The
loss of neurological function can illustrate the location
of damage to the cerebrum. Memory functions are
attributed to the temporal lobe, particularly the medial
temporal lobe structures known as the hippocampus
and amygdala, along with the adjacent cortex.
Evidence of the importance of these structures comes
from the side effects of a bilateral temporal lobectomy
that were studied in detail in patient HM.
Losses of language and speech functions, known as
aphasias, are associated with damage to the important
integration areas in the left hemisphere known as
Broca’s or Wernicke’s areas, as well as the connections
in the white matter between them. Different types of
aphasia are named for the particular structures that
are damaged. Assessment of the functions of the
sensorium includes praxis and gnosis. The subtests
related to these functions depend on multimodal
integration, as well as language-dependent processing.
The prefrontal cortex contains structures important for
planning, judgment, reasoning, and working memory.
Damage to these areas can result in changes to
personality, mood, and behavior. The famous case of
Phineas Gage suggests a role for this cortex in
personality, as does the outdated practice of prefrontal
lobectomy.
16.3 The Cranial Nerve Exam
The cranial nerves can be separated into four major
groups associated with the subtests of the cranial
nerve exam. First are the sensory nerves, then the
nerves that control eye movement, the nerves of the
oral cavity and superior pharynx, and the nerve that
controls movements of the neck.
The olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves are
strictly sensory nerves for smell, sight, and balance
and hearing, whereas the trigeminal, facial, and
glossopharyngeal nerves carry somatosensation of the
16 • Chapter Review
655
face, and taste—separated between the anterior two-
thirds of the tongue and the posterior one-third.
Special senses are tested by presenting the particular
stimuli to each receptive organ. General senses can be
tested through sensory discrimination of touch versus
painful stimuli.
The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves
control the extraocular muscles and are connected by
the medial longitudinal fasciculus to coordinate gaze.
Testing conjugate gaze is as simple as having the
patient follow a visual target, like a pen tip, through the
visual field ending with an approach toward the face to
test convergence and accommodation. Along with the
vestibular functions of the eighth nerve, the vestibulo-
ocular reflex stabilizes gaze during head movements by
coordinating equilibrium sensations with the eye
movement systems.
The trigeminal nerve controls the muscles of chewing,
which are tested for stretch reflexes. Motor functions of
the facial nerve are usually obvious if facial expressions
are compromised, but can be tested by having the
patient raise their eyebrows, smile, and frown.
Movements of the tongue, soft palate, or superior
pharynx can be observed directly while the patient
swallows, while the gag reflex is elicited, or while the
patient says repetitive consonant sounds. The motor
control of the gag reflex is largely controlled by fibers in
the vagus nerve and constitutes a test of that nerve
because the parasympathetic functions of that nerve
are involved in visceral regulation, such as regulating
the heartbeat and digestion.
Movement of the head and neck using the
sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles is
controlled by the accessory nerve. Flexing of the neck
and strength testing of those muscles reviews the
function of that nerve.
16.4 The Sensory and Motor Exams
The sensory and motor exams assess function related
to the spinal cord and the nerves connected to it.
Sensory functions are associated with the dorsal
regions of the spinal cord, whereas motor function is
associated with the ventral side. Localizing damage to
the spinal cord is related to assessments of the
peripheral projections mapped to dermatomes.
Sensory tests address the various submodalities of the
somatic senses: touch, temperature, vibration, pain,
and proprioception. Results of the subtests can point to
trauma in the spinal cord gray matter, white matter, or
even in connections to the cerebral cortex.
Motor tests focus on the function of the muscles and
the connections of the descending motor pathway.
Muscle tone and strength are tested for upper and
lower extremities. Input to the muscles comes from
the descending cortical input of upper motor neurons
and the direct innervation of lower motor neurons.
Reflexes can either be based on deep stimulation of
tendons or superficial stimulation of the skin. The
presence of reflexive contractions helps to differentiate
motor disorders between the upper and lower motor
neurons. The specific signs associated with motor
disorders can establish the difference further, based on
the type of paralysis, the state of muscle tone, and
specific indicators such as pronator drift or the
Babinski sign.
16.5 The Coordination and Gait Exams
The cerebellum is an important part of motor function
in the nervous system. It apparently plays a role in
procedural learning, which would include motor skills
such as riding a bike or throwing a football. The basis
for these roles is likely to be tied into the role the
cerebellum plays as a comparator for voluntary
movement.
The motor commands from the cerebral hemispheres
travel along the corticospinal pathway, which passes
through the pons. Collateral branches of these fibers
synapse on neurons in the pons, which then project
into the cerebellar cortex through the middle cerebellar
peduncles. Ascending sensory feedback, entering
through the inferior cerebellar peduncles, provides
information about motor performance. The cerebellar
cortex compares the command to the actual
performance and can adjust the descending input to
compensate for any mismatch. The output from deep
cerebellar nuclei projects through the superior
cerebellar peduncles to initiate descending signals
from the red nucleus to the spinal cord.
The primary role of the cerebellum in relation to the
spinal cord is through the spinocerebellum; it controls
posture and gait with significant input from the
vestibular system. Deficits in cerebellar function result
in ataxias, or a specific kind of movement disorder. The
root cause of the ataxia may be the sensory
input—either the proprioceptive input from the spinal
cord or the equilibrium input from the vestibular
system, or direct damage to the cerebellum by stroke,
trauma, hereditary factors, or toxins.
656
16 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/neuroexam)
that provides a demonstration of the neurological
exam—a series of tests that can be performed
rapidly when a patient is initially brought into an
emergency department. The exam can be repeated
on a regular basis to keep a record of how and if
neurological function changes over time. In what
order were the sections of the neurological exam
tested in this video, and which section seemed to
be left out?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
neuroexam2) for an introduction to the neurological
exam. Studying the neurological exam can give
insight into how structure and function in the
nervous system are interdependent. This is a tool
both in the clinic and in the classroom, but for
different reasons. In the clinic, this is a powerful but
simple tool to assess a patient’s neurological
function. In the classroom, it is a different way to
think about the nervous system. Though medical
technology provides noninvasive imaging and real-
time functional data, the presenter says these
cannot replace the history at the core of the
medical examination. What does history mean in
the context of medical practice?
3. Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/3word) to
learn about a young man who texts his fiancée in a
panic as he finds that he is having trouble
remembering things. At the hospital, a neurologist
administers the mental status exam, which is
mostly normal except for the three-word recall test.
The young man could not recall them even 30
seconds after hearing them and repeating them
back to the doctor. An undiscovered mass in the
mediastinum region was found to be Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, a type of cancer that affects the
immune system and likely caused antibodies to
attack the nervous system. The patient eventually
regained his ability to remember, though the events
in the hospital were always elusive. Considering
that the effects on memory were temporary, but
resulted in the loss of the specific events of the
hospital stay, what regions of the brain were likely
to have been affected by the antibodies and what
type of memory does that represent?
4. Watch the video (http://openstax.org/l/2brains)
titled “The Man With Two Brains” to see the
neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga introduce a
patient he has worked with for years who has had
his corpus callosum cut, separating his two cerebral
hemispheres. A few tests are run to demonstrate
how this manifests in tests of cerebral function.
Unlike normal people, this patient can perform two
independent tasks at the same time because the
lines of communication between the right and left
sides of his brain have been removed. Whereas a
person with an intact corpus callosum cannot
overcome the dominance of one hemisphere over
the other, this patient can. If the left cerebral
hemisphere is dominant in the majority of people,
why would right-handedness be most common?
5. Watch this short video (http://openstax.org/l/
facialnerve) to see an examination of the facial
nerve using some simple tests. The facial nerve
controls the muscles of facial expression. Severe
deficits will be obvious in watching someone use
those muscles for normal control. One side of the
face might not move like the other side. But
directed tests, especially for contraction against
resistance, require a formal testing of the muscles.
The muscles of the upper and lower face need to be
tested. The strength test in this video involves the
patient squeezing her eyes shut and the examiner
trying to pry her eyes open. Why does the examiner
ask her to try a second time?
6. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/2point) to
see a quick demonstration of two-point
discrimination. Touching a specialized caliper to the
surface of the skin will measure the distance
between two points that are perceived as distinct
stimuli versus a single stimulus. The patient keeps
their eyes closed while the examiner switches
between using both points of the caliper or just one.
The patient then must indicate whether one or two
stimuli are in contact with the skin. Why is the
distance between the caliper points closer on the
fingertips as opposed to the palm of the hand? And
what do you think the distance would be on the
arm, or the shoulder?
16 • Interactive Link Questions
657
7. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/reflextest)
to see how to test reflexes in the abdomen. Testing
reflexes of the trunk is not commonly performed in
the neurological exam, but if findings suggest a
problem with the thoracic segments of the spinal
cord, a series of superficial reflexes of the abdomen
can localize function to those segments. If
contraction is not observed when the skin lateral to
the umbilicus (belly button) is stimulated, what
level of the spinal cord may be damaged?
8. Watch this short video (http://openstax.org/l/
stationtest) to see a test for station. Station refers
to the position a person adopts when they are
standing still. The examiner would look for issues
with balance, which coordinates proprioceptive,
vestibular, and visual information in the cerebellum.
To test the ability of a subject to maintain balance,
asking them to stand or hop on one foot can be
more demanding. The examiner may also push the
subject to see if they can maintain balance. An
abnormal finding in the test of station is if the feet
are placed far apart. Why would a wide stance
suggest problems with cerebellar function?
Review Questions
9. Which major section of the neurological exam is
most likely to reveal damage to the cerebellum?
a.
cranial nerve exam
b.
mental status exam
c.
sensory exam
d.
coordination exam
10. What function would most likely be affected by a
restriction of a blood vessel in the cerebral cortex?
a.
language
b.
gait
c.
facial expressions
d.
knee-jerk reflex
11. Which major section of the neurological exam
includes subtests that are sometimes considered
a separate set of tests concerned with walking?
a.
mental status exam
b.
cranial nerve exam
c.
coordination exam
d.
sensory exam
12. Memory, emotional, language, and sensorimotor
deficits together are most likely the result of what
kind of damage?
a.
stroke
b.
developmental disorder
c.
whiplash
d.
gunshot wound
13. Where is language function localized in the
majority of people?
a.
cerebellum
b.
right cerebral hemisphere
c.
hippocampus
d.
left cerebral hemisphere
14. Which of the following could be elements of
cytoarchitecture, as related to Brodmann’s
microscopic studies of the cerebral cortex?
a.
connections to the cerebellum
b.
activation by visual stimuli
c.
number of neurons per square millimeter
d.
number of gyri or sulci
15. Which of the following could be a multimodal
integrative area?
a.
primary visual cortex
b.
premotor cortex
c.
hippocampus
d.
Wernicke’s area
16. Which is an example of episodic memory?
a.
how to bake a cake
b.
your last birthday party
c.
how old you are
d.
needing to wear an oven mitt to take a cake
out of the oven
17. Which type of aphasia is more like hearing a
foreign language spoken?
a.
receptive aphasia
b.
expressive aphasia
c.
conductive aphasia
d.
Broca’s aphasia
18. What region of the cerebral cortex is associated
with understanding language, both from another
person and the language a person generates
himself or herself?
a.
medial temporal lobe
b.
ventromedial prefrontal cortex
c.
superior temporal gyrus
d.
postcentral gyrus
658
16 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
19. Without olfactory sensation to complement
gustatory stimuli, food will taste bland unless it is
seasoned with which substance?
a.
salt
b.
thyme
c.
garlic
d.
olive oil
20. Which of the following cranial nerves is not part of
the VOR?
a.
optic
b.
oculomotor
c.
abducens
d.
vestibulocochlear
21. Which nerve is responsible for controlling the
muscles that result in the gag reflex?
a.
trigeminal
b.
facial
c.
glossopharyngeal
d.
vagus
22. Which nerve is responsible for taste, as well as
salivation, in the anterior oral cavity?
a.
facial
b.
glossopharyngeal
c.
vagus
d.
hypoglossal
23. Which of the following nerves controls movements
of the neck?
a.
oculomotor
b.
vestibulocochlear
c.
spinal accessory
d.
hypoglossal
24. Which of the following is not part of the
corticospinal pathway?
a.
cerebellar deep white matter
b.
midbrain
c.
medulla
d.
lateral column
25. Which subtest is directed at proprioceptive
sensation?
a.
two-point discrimination
b.
tactile movement
c.
vibration
d.
Romberg test
26. What term describes the inability to lift the arm
above the level of the shoulder?
a.
paralysis
b.
paresis
c.
fasciculation
d.
fibrillation
27. Which type of reflex is the jaw-jerk reflex that is
part of the cranial nerve exam for the
vestibulocochlear nerve?
a.
visceral reflex
b.
withdrawal reflex
c.
stretch reflex
d.
superficial reflex
28. Which of the following is a feature of both somatic
and visceral senses?
a.
requires cerebral input
b.
causes skeletal muscle contraction
c.
projects to a ganglion near the target effector
d.
involves an axon in the ventral nerve root
29. Which white matter structure carries information
from the cerebral cortex to the cerebellum?
a.
cerebral peduncle
b.
superior cerebellar peduncle
c.
middle cerebellar peduncle
d.
inferior cerebellar peduncle
30. Which region of the cerebellum receives
proprioceptive input from the spinal cord?
a.
vermis
b.
left hemisphere
c.
flocculonodular lobe
d.
right hemisphere
31. Which of the following tests cerebellar function
related to gait?
a.
toe-to-finger
b.
station
c.
lah-kah-pah
d.
finger-to-nose
32. Which of the following is not a cause of cerebellar
ataxia?
a.
mercury from fish
b.
drinking alcohol
c.
antibiotics
d.
hereditary degeneration of the cerebellum
33. Which of the following functions cannot be
attributed to the cerebellum?
a.
comparing motor commands and sensory
feedback
b.
associating sensory stimuli with learned
behavior
c.
coordinating complex movements
d.
processing visual information
16 • Review Questions
659
Critical Thinking Questions
34. Why is a rapid assessment of neurological function
important in an emergency situation?
35. How is the diagnostic category of TIA different
from a stroke?
36. A patient’s performance of the majority of the
mental status exam subtests is in line with the
expected norms, but the patient cannot repeat a
string of numbers given by the examiner. What is a
likely explanation?
37. A patient responds to the question “What is your
name?” with a look of incomprehension. Which of
the two major language areas is most likely
affected and what is the name for that type of
aphasia?
38. As a person ages, their ability to focus on near
objects (accommodation) changes. If a person is
already myopic (near-sighted), why would
corrective lenses not be necessary to read a book
or computer screen?
39. When a patient flexes their neck, the head tips to
the right side. Also, their tongue sticks out slightly
to the left when they try to stick it straight out.
Where is the damage to the brain stem most likely
located?
40. The location of somatosensation is based on the
topographical map of sensory innervation. What
does this mean?
41. Why are upper motor neuron lesions characterized
by “spastic paralysis”?
42. Learning to ride a bike is a motor function
dependent on the cerebellum. Why are the
different regions of the cerebellum involved in this
complex motor learning?
43. Alcohol intoxication can produce slurred speech.
How is this related to cerebellar function?
660
16 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 17
The Endocrine System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the contributions of the endocrine system to homeostasis
•
Discuss the chemical composition of hormones and the mechanisms of hormone action
•
Summarize the site of production, regulation, and effects of the hormones of the pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, adrenal, and pineal glands
•
Discuss the hormonal regulation of the reproductive system
•
Explain the role of the pancreatic endocrine cells in the regulation of blood glucose
•
Identify the hormones released by the heart, kidneys, and other organs with secondary endocrine functions
•
Discuss several common diseases associated with endocrine system dysfunction
•
Discuss the embryonic development of, and the effects of aging on, the endocrine system
You may never have thought of it this way, but when you send a text message to two friends to
meet you at the dining hall at six, you’re sending digital signals that (you hope) will affect their behavior—even
though they are some distance away. Similarly, certain cells send chemical signals to other cells in the body that
influence their behavior. This long-distance intercellular communication, coordination, and control is critical for
homeostasis, and it is the fundamental function of the endocrine system.
17.1 An Overview of the Endocrine System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the types of intercellular communication, their importance, mechanisms, and effects
•
Identify the major organs and tissues of the endocrine system and their location in the body
Communication is a process in which a sender transmits signals to one or more receivers to control and coordinate
actions. In the human body, two major organ systems participate in relatively “long distance” communication: the
nervous system and the endocrine system. Together, these two systems are primarily responsible for maintaining
Figure 17.1
A Child Catches a Falling Leaf Hormones of the endocrine system coordinate and control growth, metabolism, temperature
regulation, the stress response, reproduction, and many other functions. (credit: “seenthroughmylense”/flickr.com)
homeostasis in the body.
Neural and Endocrine Signaling
The nervous system uses two types of intercellular communication—electrical and chemical signaling—either by the
direct action of an electrical potential, or in the latter case, through the action of chemical neurotransmitters such as
serotonin or norepinephrine. Neurotransmitters act locally and rapidly. When an electrical signal in the form of an
action potential arrives at the synaptic terminal, they diffuse across the synaptic cleft (the gap between a sending
neuron and a receiving neuron or muscle cell). Once the neurotransmitters interact (bind) with receptors on the
receiving (post-synaptic) cell, the receptor stimulation is transduced into a response such as continued electrical
signaling or modification of cellular response. The target cell responds within milliseconds of receiving the chemical
“message”; this response then ceases very quickly once the neural signaling ends. In this way, neural
communication enables body functions that involve quick, brief actions, such as movement, sensation, and
cognition.In contrast, the endocrine system uses just one method of communication: chemical signaling. These
signals are sent by the endocrine organs, which secrete chemicals—the hormone—into the extracellular fluid.
Hormones are transported primarily via the bloodstream throughout the body, where they bind to receptors on
target cells, inducing a characteristic response. As a result, endocrine signaling requires more time than neural
signaling to prompt a response in target cells, though the precise amount of time varies with different hormones. For
example, the hormones released when you are confronted with a dangerous or frightening situation, called the fight-
or-flight response, occur by the release of adrenal hormones—epinephrine and norepinephrine—within seconds. In
contrast, it may take up to 48 hours for target cells to respond to certain reproductive hormones.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/hormonebind) to watch an animation of the events that occur when a hormone
binds to a cell membrane receptor. What is the secondary messenger made by adenylyl cyclase during the activation
of liver cells by epinephrine?
In addition, endocrine signaling is typically less specific than neural signaling. The same hormone may play a role in
a variety of different physiological processes depending on the target cells involved. For example, the hormone
oxytocin promotes uterine contractions in people in labor. It is also important in breastfeeding, and may be involved
in the sexual response and in feelings of emotional attachment in humans.
In general, the nervous system involves quick responses to rapid changes in the external environment, and the
endocrine system is usually slower acting—taking care of the internal environment of the body, maintaining
homeostasis, and controlling reproduction (Table 17.1). So how does the fight-or-flight response that was
mentioned earlier happen so quickly if hormones are usually slower acting? It is because the two systems are
connected. It is the fast action of the nervous system in response to the danger in the environment that stimulates
the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones. As a result, the nervous system can cause rapid endocrine responses
to keep up with sudden changes in both the external and internal environments when necessary.
Endocrine and Nervous Systems
Endocrine system
Nervous system
Signaling mechanism(s)
Chemical
Chemical/electrical
Primary chemical signal
Hormones
Neurotransmitters
Distance traveled
Long or short
Always short
TABLE 17.1
662
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Endocrine system
Nervous system
Response time
Fast or slow
Always fast
Environment targeted
Internal
Internal and external
TABLE 17.1
Structures of the Endocrine System
The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and organs that secrete hormones as a primary or secondary
function. The endocrine gland is the major player in this system. The primary function of these ductless glands is to
secrete their hormones directly into the surrounding fluid. The interstitial fluid and the blood vessels then transport
the hormones throughout the body. The endocrine system includes the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal, and
pineal glands (Figure 17.2). Some of these glands have both endocrine and non-endocrine functions. For example,
the pancreas contains cells that function in digestion as well as cells that secrete the hormones insulin and
glucagon, which regulate blood glucose levels. The hypothalamus, thymus, heart, kidneys, stomach, small intestine,
liver, skin, ovaries, and testes are other organs that contain cells with endocrine function. Moreover, adipose tissue
has long been known to produce hormones, and recent research has revealed that even bone tissue has endocrine
functions.
FIGURE 17.2
Endocrine System
Endocrine glands and cells are located throughout the body and play an important role in
homeostasis.
The ductless endocrine glands are not to be confused with the body’s exocrine system, whose glands release their
secretions through ducts. Examples of exocrine glands include the sebaceous and sweat glands of the skin. As just
noted, the pancreas also has an exocrine function: most of its cells secrete pancreatic juice through the pancreatic
17.1 • An Overview of the Endocrine System
663
and accessory ducts to the lumen of the small intestine.
Other Types of Chemical Signaling
In endocrine signaling, hormones secreted into the extracellular fluid diffuse into the blood or lymph, and can then
travel great distances throughout the body. In contrast, autocrine signaling takes place within the same cell. An
autocrine (auto- = “self”) is a chemical that elicits a response in the same cell that secreted it. Interleukin-1, or
IL-1, is a signaling molecule that plays an important role in inflammatory response. The cells that secrete IL-1 have
receptors on their cell surface that bind these molecules, resulting in autocrine signaling.
Local intercellular communication is the province of the paracrine, also called a paracrine factor, which is a
chemical that induces a response in neighboring cells. Although paracrines may enter the bloodstream, their
concentration is generally too low to elicit a response from distant tissues. A familiar example to those with asthma
is histamine, a paracrine that is released by immune cells in the bronchial tree. Histamine causes the smooth
muscle cells of the bronchi to constrict, narrowing the airways. Another example is the neurotransmitters of the
nervous system, which act only locally within the synaptic cleft.
CAREER CONNECTION
Endocrinologist
Endocrinology is a specialty in the field of medicine that focuses on the treatment of endocrine system disorders.
Endocrinologists—medical doctors who specialize in this field—are experts in treating diseases associated with
hormonal systems, ranging from thyroid disease to diabetes mellitus. Endocrine surgeons treat endocrine disease
through the removal, or resection, of the affected endocrine gland.
Patients who are referred to endocrinologists may have signs and symptoms or blood test results that suggest
excessive or impaired functioning of an endocrine gland or endocrine cells. The endocrinologist may order additional
blood tests to determine whether the patient’s hormonal levels are abnormal, or they may stimulate or suppress the
function of the suspect endocrine gland and then have blood taken for analysis. Treatment varies according to the
diagnosis. Some endocrine disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, may respond to lifestyle changes such as modest
weight loss, adoption of a healthy diet, and regular physical activity. Other disorders may require medication, such
as hormone replacement, and routine monitoring by the endocrinologist. These include disorders of the pituitary
gland that can affect growth and disorders of the thyroid gland that can result in a variety of metabolic problems.
Some patients experience health problems as a result of the normal decline in hormones that can accompany aging.
These patients can consult with an endocrinologist to weigh the risks and benefits of hormone replacement therapy
intended to boost their natural levels of reproductive hormones.
In addition to treating patients, endocrinologists may be involved in research to improve the understanding of
endocrine system disorders and develop new treatments for these diseases.
17.2 Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the three major classes of hormones on the basis of chemical structure
•
Compare and contrast intracellular and cell membrane hormone receptors
•
Describe signaling pathways that involve cAMP and IP3
•
Identify several factors that influence a target cell’s response
•
Discuss the role of feedback loops and humoral, hormonal, and neural stimuli in hormone control
Although a given hormone may travel throughout the body in the bloodstream, it will affect the activity only of its
target cells; that is, cells with receptors for that particular hormone. Once the hormone binds to the receptor, a chain
of events is initiated that leads to the target cell’s response. Hormones play a critical role in the regulation of
physiological processes because of the target cell responses they regulate. These responses contribute to human
reproduction, growth and development of body tissues, metabolism, fluid, and electrolyte balance, sleep, and many
664
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
other body functions. The major hormones of the human body and their effects are identified in Table 17.2.
Endocrine Glands and Their Major Hormones
Endocrine
gland
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Pituitary
(anterior)
Growth hormone
(GH)
Protein
Promotes growth of body tissues
Pituitary
(anterior)
Prolactin (PRL)
Peptide
Promotes milk production
Pituitary
(anterior)
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates thyroid hormone release
Pituitary
(anterior)
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
Peptide
Stimulates hormone release by adrenal cortex
Pituitary
(anterior)
Follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates gamete production
Pituitary
(anterior)
Luteinizing
hormone (LH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates androgen production by gonads
Pituitary
(posterior)
Antidiuretic
hormone (ADH)
Peptide
Stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys
Pituitary
(posterior)
Oxytocin
Peptide
Stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth
Thyroid
Thyroxine (T4),
triiodothyronine
(T3)
Amine
Stimulate basal metabolic rate
Thyroid
Calcitonin
Peptide
Reduces blood Ca2+ levels
Parathyroid
Parathyroid
hormone (PTH)
Peptide
Increases blood Ca2+ levels
Adrenal
(cortex)
Aldosterone
Steroid
Increases blood Na+ levels
Adrenal
(cortex)
Cortisol,
corticosterone,
cortisone
Steroid
Increase blood glucose levels
Adrenal
(medulla)
Epinephrine,
norepinephrine
Amine
Stimulate fight-or-flight response
Pineal
Melatonin
Amine
Regulates sleep cycles
TABLE 17.2
17.2 • Hormones
665
Endocrine
gland
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Pancreas
Insulin
Protein
Reduces blood glucose levels
Pancreas
Glucagon
Protein
Increases blood glucose levels
Testes
Testosterone
Steroid
Stimulates development of sex characteristics including a
deeper voice, increased muscle mass, development of
body hair, and sperm production
Ovaries
Estrogens and
progesterone
Steroid
Stimulate development of sex characteristics including the
development of adipose and breast tissue, and prepare the
body for childbirth
TABLE 17.2
Types of Hormones
The hormones of the human body can be divided into two major groups on the basis of their chemical structure.
Hormones derived from amino acids include amines, peptides, and proteins. Those derived from lipids include
steroids (Figure 17.3). These chemical groups affect a hormone’s distribution, the type of receptors it binds to, and
other aspects of its function.
666
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 17.3
Amine, Peptide, Protein, and Steroid Hormone Structure
Amine Hormones
Hormones derived from the modification of amino acids are referred to as amine hormones. Typically, the original
structure of the amino acid is modified such that a –COOH, or carboxyl, group is removed, whereas the
, or
amine, group remains.
Amine hormones are synthesized from the amino acids tryptophan or tyrosine. An example of a hormone derived
from tryptophan is melatonin, which is secreted by the pineal gland and helps regulate circadian rhythm. Tyrosine
derivatives include the metabolism-regulating thyroid hormones, as well as the catecholamines, such as
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are secreted by the adrenal medulla
and play a role in the fight-or-flight response, whereas dopamine is secreted by the hypothalamus and inhibits the
17.2 • Hormones
667
release of certain anterior pituitary hormones.
Peptide and Protein Hormones
Whereas the amine hormones are derived from a single amino acid, peptide and protein hormones consist of
multiple amino acids that link to form an amino acid chain. Peptide hormones consist of short chains of amino acids,
whereas protein hormones are longer polypeptides. Both types are synthesized like other body proteins: DNA is
transcribed into mRNA, which is translated into an amino acid chain.
Examples of peptide hormones include antidiuretic hormone (ADH), a pituitary hormone important in fluid balance,
and atrial-natriuretic peptide, which is produced by the heart and helps to decrease blood pressure. Some examples
of protein hormones include growth hormone, which is produced by the pituitary gland, and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), which has an attached carbohydrate group and is thus classified as a glycoprotein. FSH helps
stimulate the maturation of eggs in the ovaries and sperm in the testes.
Steroid Hormones
The primary hormones derived from lipids are steroids. Steroid hormones are derived from the lipid cholesterol. For
example, the reproductive hormones testosterone and the estrogens—which are produced by the gonads (testes
and ovaries)—are steroid hormones. The adrenal glands produce the steroid hormone aldosterone, which is involved
in osmoregulation, and cortisol, which plays a role in metabolism.
Like cholesterol, steroid hormones are not soluble in water (they are hydrophobic). Because blood is water-based,
lipid-derived hormones must travel to their target cell bound to a transport protein. This more complex structure
extends the half-life of steroid hormones much longer than that of hormones derived from amino acids. A hormone’s
half-life is the time required for half the concentration of the hormone to be degraded. For example, the lipid-
derived hormone cortisol has a half-life of approximately 60 to 90 minutes. In contrast, the amino acid–derived
hormone epinephrine has a half-life of approximately one minute.
Pathways of Hormone Action
The message a hormone sends is received by a hormone receptor, a protein located either inside the cell or within
the cell membrane. The receptor will process the message by initiating other signaling events or cellular
mechanisms that result in the target cell’s response. Hormone receptors recognize molecules with specific shapes
and side groups, and respond only to those hormones that are recognized. The same type of receptor may be
located on cells in different body tissues, and trigger somewhat different responses. Thus, the response triggered by
a hormone depends not only on the hormone, but also on the target cell.
Once the target cell receives the hormone signal, it can respond in a variety of ways. The response may include the
stimulation of protein synthesis, activation or deactivation of enzymes, alteration in the permeability of the cell
membrane, altered rates of mitosis and cell growth, and stimulation of the secretion of products. Moreover, a single
hormone may be capable of inducing different responses in a given cell.
Pathways Involving Intracellular Hormone Receptors
Intracellular hormone receptors are located inside the cell. Hormones that bind to this type of receptor must be able
to cross the cell membrane. Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and therefore can readily diffuse
through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane to reach the intracellular receptor (Figure 17.4). Thyroid hormones,
cross the cell membrane by a specific carrier-mediated mechanism that is energy and Na+ dependent.
The location of steroid and thyroid hormone binding differs slightly: a steroid hormone may bind to its receptor
within the cytosol or within the nucleus. In either case, this binding generates a hormone-receptor complex that
moves toward the chromatin in the cell nucleus and binds to a particular segment of the cell’s DNA. In contrast,
thyroid hormones bind to receptors already bound to DNA. For both steroid and thyroid hormones, binding of the
hormone-receptor complex with DNA triggers transcription of a target gene to mRNA, which moves to the cytosol
and directs protein synthesis by ribosomes.
668
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 17.4
Binding of Lipid-Soluble Hormones
A steroid hormone directly initiates the production of proteins within a target cell.
Steroid hormones easily diffuse through the cell membrane. The hormone binds to its receptor in the cytosol, forming a receptor–hormone
complex. The receptor–hormone complex then enters the nucleus and binds to the target gene on the DNA. Transcription of the gene
creates a messenger RNA that is translated into the desired protein within the cytoplasm.
Pathways Involving Cell Membrane Hormone Receptors
Hydrophilic, or water-soluble, hormones are unable to diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane and
must therefore pass on their message to a receptor located at the surface of the cell. Except for thyroid hormones,
which are lipid-soluble, all amino acid–derived hormones bind to cell membrane receptors that are located, at least
in part, on the extracellular surface of the cell membrane. Therefore, they do not directly affect the transcription of
target genes, but instead initiate a signaling cascade that is carried out by a molecule called a second messenger.
In this case, the hormone is called a first messenger.
The second messenger used by most hormones is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). In the cAMP second
messenger system, a water-soluble hormone binds to its receptor in the cell membrane (Step 1 in Figure 17.5). This
receptor is associated with an intracellular component called a G protein, and binding of the hormone activates the
G-protein component (Step 2). The activated G protein in turn activates an enzyme called adenylyl cyclase, also
known as adenylate cyclase (Step 3), which converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cAMP (Step 4). As the second
messenger, cAMP activates a type of enzyme called a protein kinase that is present in the cytosol (Step 5).
Activated protein kinases initiate a phosphorylation cascade, in which multiple protein kinases phosphorylate (add
a phosphate group to) numerous and various cellular proteins, including other enzymes (Step 6).
17.2 • Hormones
669
FIGURE 17.5
Binding of Water-Soluble Hormones
Water-soluble hormones cannot diffuse through the cell membrane. These
hormones must bind to a surface cell-membrane receptor. The receptor then initiates a cell-signaling pathway within the cell involving G
proteins, adenylyl cyclase, the secondary messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP), and protein kinases. In the final step, these protein kinases
phosphorylate proteins in the cytoplasm. This activates proteins in the cell that carry out the changes specified by the hormone.
The phosphorylation of cellular proteins can trigger a wide variety of effects, from nutrient metabolism to the
synthesis of different hormones and other products. The effects vary according to the type of target cell, the G
proteins and kinases involved, and the phosphorylation of proteins. Examples of hormones that use cAMP as a
second messenger include calcitonin, which is important for bone construction and regulating blood calcium levels;
glucagon, which plays a role in blood glucose levels; and thyroid-stimulating hormone, which causes the release of
T3 and T4 from the thyroid gland.
Overall, the phosphorylation cascade significantly increases the efficiency, speed, and specificity of the hormonal
response, as thousands of signaling events can be initiated simultaneously in response to a very low concentration
of hormone in the bloodstream. However, the duration of the hormone signal is short, as cAMP is quickly deactivated
by the enzyme phosphodiesterase (PDE), which is located in the cytosol. The action of PDE helps to ensure that a
target cell’s response ceases quickly unless new hormones arrive at the cell membrane.
Importantly, there are also G proteins that decrease the levels of cAMP in the cell in response to hormone binding.
For example, when growth hormone–inhibiting hormone (GHIH), also known as somatostatin, binds to its receptors
in the pituitary gland, the level of cAMP decreases, thereby inhibiting the secretion of human growth hormone.
Not all water-soluble hormones initiate the cAMP second messenger system. One common alternative system uses
calcium ions as a second messenger. In this system, G proteins activate the enzyme phospholipase C (PLC), which
functions similarly to adenylyl cyclase. Once activated, PLC cleaves a membrane-bound phospholipid into two
molecules: diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). Like cAMP, DAG activates protein kinases that
initiate a phosphorylation cascade. At the same time, IP3 causes calcium ions to be released from storage sites
within the cytosol, such as from within the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. The calcium ions then act as second
messengers in two ways: they can influence enzymatic and other cellular activities directly, or they can bind to
calcium-binding proteins, the most common of which is calmodulin. Upon binding calcium, calmodulin is able to
modulate protein kinase within the cell. Examples of hormones that use calcium ions as a second messenger
system include angiotensin II, which helps regulate blood pressure through vasoconstriction, and growth
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), which causes the pituitary gland to release growth hormones.
670
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Factors Affecting Target Cell Response
You will recall that target cells must have receptors specific to a given hormone if that hormone is to trigger a
response. But several other factors influence the target cell response. For example, the presence of a significant
level of a hormone circulating in the bloodstream can cause its target cells to decrease their number of receptors for
that hormone. This process is called downregulation, and it allows cells to become less reactive to the excessive
hormone levels. When the level of a hormone is chronically reduced, target cells engage in upregulation to increase
their number of receptors. This process allows cells to be more sensitive to the hormone that is present. Cells can
also alter the sensitivity of the receptors themselves to various hormones.
Two or more hormones can interact to affect the response of cells in a variety of ways. The three most common
types of interaction are as follows:
•
The permissive effect, in which the presence of one hormone enables another hormone to act. For example,
thyroid hormones have complex permissive relationships with certain reproductive hormones. A dietary
deficiency of iodine, a component of thyroid hormones, can therefore affect reproductive system development
and functioning.
•
The synergistic effect, in which two hormones with similar effects produce an amplified response. In some
cases, two hormones are required for an adequate response. For example, two different reproductive
hormones—FSH from the pituitary gland and estrogens from the ovaries—are required for the maturation of
female ova (egg cells).
•
The antagonistic effect, in which two hormones have opposing effects. A familiar example is the effect of two
pancreatic hormones, insulin and glucagon. Insulin increases the liver’s storage of glucose as glycogen,
decreasing blood glucose, whereas glucagon stimulates the breakdown of glycogen stores, increasing blood
glucose.
Regulation of Hormone Secretion
To prevent abnormal hormone levels and a potential disease state, hormone levels must be tightly controlled. The
body maintains this control by balancing hormone production and degradation. Feedback loops govern the initiation
and maintenance of most hormone secretion in response to various stimuli.
Role of Feedback Loops
The contribution of feedback loops to homeostasis will only be briefly reviewed here. Positive feedback loops are
characterized by the release of additional hormone in response to an original hormone release. The release of
oxytocin during childbirth is a positive feedback loop. The initial release of oxytocin begins to signal the uterine
muscles to contract, which pushes the fetus toward the cervix, causing it to stretch. This, in turn, signals the
pituitary gland to release more oxytocin, causing labor contractions to intensify. The release of oxytocin decreases
after the birth of the child.
The more common method of hormone regulation is the negative feedback loop. Negative feedback is characterized
by the inhibition of further secretion of a hormone in response to adequate levels of that hormone. This allows blood
levels of the hormone to be regulated within a narrow range. An example of a negative feedback loop is the release
of glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal glands, as directed by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. As
glucocorticoid concentrations in the blood rise, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland reduce their signaling to the
adrenal glands to prevent additional glucocorticoid secretion (Figure 17.6).
17.2 • Hormones
671
FIGURE 17.6
Negative Feedback Loop
The release of adrenal glucocorticoids is stimulated by the release of hormones from the
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. This signaling is inhibited when glucocorticoid levels become elevated by causing negative signals to the
pituitary gland and hypothalamus.
Role of Endocrine Gland Stimuli
Reflexes triggered by both chemical and neural stimuli control endocrine activity. These reflexes may be simple,
involving only one hormone response, or they may be more complex and involve many hormones, as is the case with
the hypothalamic control of various anterior pituitary–controlled hormones.
Humoral stimuli are changes in blood levels of non-hormone chemicals, such as nutrients or ions, which cause the
release or inhibition of a hormone to, in turn, maintain homeostasis. For example, osmoreceptors in the
hypothalamus detect changes in blood osmolarity (the concentration of solutes in the blood plasma). If blood
osmolarity is too high, meaning that the blood is not dilute enough, osmoreceptors signal the hypothalamus to
release ADH. The hormone causes the kidneys to reabsorb more water and reduce the volume of urine produced.
This reabsorption causes a reduction of the osmolarity of the blood, diluting the blood to the appropriate level. The
regulation of blood glucose is another example. High blood glucose levels cause the release of insulin from the
pancreas, which increases glucose uptake by cells and liver storage of glucose as glycogen.
An endocrine gland may also secrete a hormone in response to the presence of another hormone produced by a
different endocrine gland. Such hormonal stimuli often involve the hypothalamus, which produces releasing and
inhibiting hormones that control the secretion of a variety of pituitary hormones.
In addition to these chemical signals, hormones can also be released in response to neural stimuli. A common
example of neural stimuli is the activation of the fight-or-flight response by the sympathetic nervous system. When
an individual perceives danger, sympathetic neurons signal the adrenal glands to secrete norepinephrine and
672
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
epinephrine. The two hormones dilate blood vessels, increase the heart and respiratory rate, and suppress the
digestive and immune systems. These responses boost the body’s transport of oxygen to the brain and muscles,
thereby improving the body’s ability to fight or flee.
17.3 The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the interrelationships of the anatomy and functions of the hypothalamus and the posterior and anterior
lobes of the pituitary gland
•
Identify the two hormones released from the posterior pituitary, their target cells, and their principal actions
•
Identify the six hormones produced by the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland, their target cells, their principal
actions, and their regulation by the hypothalamus
The hypothalamus–pituitary complex can be thought of as the “command center” of the endocrine system. This
complex secretes several hormones that directly produce responses in target tissues, as well as hormones that
regulate the synthesis and secretion of hormones of other glands. In addition, the hypothalamus–pituitary complex
coordinates the messages of the endocrine and nervous systems. In many cases, a stimulus received by the nervous
system must pass through the hypothalamus–pituitary complex to be translated into hormones that can initiate a
response.
Everyday Connection
Bisphenol A and Endocrine Disruption
You may have heard news reports about the effects of a chemical called bisphenol A (BPA) in various types of
food packaging. BPA is used in the manufacturing of hard plastics and epoxy resins. Common food-related items
that may contain BPA include the lining of aluminum cans, plastic food-storage containers, drinking cups, as well
as baby bottles and “sippy” cups. Other uses of BPA include medical equipment, dental fillings, and the lining of
water pipes.
Research suggests that BPA is an endocrine disruptor, meaning that it negatively interferes with the endocrine
system, particularly during the prenatal and postnatal development period. In particular, BPA mimics the
hormonal effects of estrogens and has the opposite effect—that of androgens. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) notes in their statement about BPA safety that although traditional toxicology studies have
supported the safety of low levels of exposure to BPA, recent studies using novel approaches to test for subtle
effects have led to some concern about the potential effects of BPA on the brain, behavior, and prostate gland in
fetuses, infants, and young children. The FDA is currently facilitating decreased use of BPA in food-related
materials. Many US companies have voluntarily removed BPA from baby bottles, “sippy” cups, and the linings of
infant formula cans, and most plastic reusable water bottles sold today boast that they are “BPA free.” In
contrast, both Canada and the European Union have completely banned the use of BPA in baby products.
The potential harmful effects of BPA have been studied in both animal models and humans and include a large
variety of health effects, such as developmental delay and disease. For example, prenatal exposure to BPA
during the first trimester of human pregnancy may be associated with wheezing and aggressive behavior during
childhood. Adults exposed to high levels of BPA may experience altered thyroid signaling and male sexual
dysfunction. BPA exposure during the prenatal or postnatal period of development in animal models has been
observed to cause neurological delays, changes in brain structure and function, sexual dysfunction, asthma, and
increased risk for multiple cancers. In vitro studies have also shown that BPA exposure causes molecular
changes that initiate the development of cancers of the breast, prostate, and brain. Although these studies have
implicated BPA in numerous ill health effects, some experts caution that some of these studies may be flawed
and that more research needs to be done. In the meantime, the FDA recommends that consumers take
precautions to limit their exposure to BPA. In addition to purchasing foods in packaging free of BPA, consumers
should avoid carrying or storing foods or liquids in bottles with the recycling code 3 or 7. Foods and liquids
should not be microwave-heated in any form of plastic: use paper, glass, or ceramics instead.
17.3 • The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
673
The hypothalamus is a structure of the diencephalon of the brain located anterior and inferior to the thalamus
(Figure 17.7). It has both neural and endocrine functions, producing and secreting many hormones. In addition, the
hypothalamus is anatomically and functionally related to the pituitary gland (or hypophysis), a bean-sized organ
suspended from it by a stem called the infundibulum (or pituitary stalk). The pituitary gland is cradled within the
sellaturcica of the sphenoid bone of the skull. It consists of two lobes that arise from distinct parts of embryonic
tissue: the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis) is neural tissue, whereas the anterior pituitary (also known as the
adenohypophysis) is glandular tissue that develops from the primitive digestive tract. The hormones secreted by the
posterior and anterior pituitary, and the intermediate zone between the lobes are summarized in Table 17.3.
FIGURE 17.7
Hypothalamus–Pituitary Complex
The hypothalamus region lies inferior and anterior to the thalamus. It connects to the
pituitary gland by the stalk-like infundibulum. The pituitary gland consists of an anterior and posterior lobe, with each lobe secreting
different hormones in response to signals from the hypothalamus.
Pituitary Hormones
Pituitary lobe
Associated hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Anterior
Growth hormone (GH)
Protein
Promotes growth of body tissues
Anterior
Prolactin (PRL)
Peptide
Promotes milk production from mammary
glands
Anterior
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates thyroid hormone release from
thyroid
Anterior
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)
Peptide
Stimulates hormone release by adrenal
cortex
Anterior
Follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates gamete production in gonads
Anterior
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Glycoprotein
Stimulates androgen production by
gonads
TABLE 17.3
674
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Pituitary lobe
Associated hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Posterior
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Peptide
Stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys
Posterior
Oxytocin
Peptide
Stimulates uterine contractions during
childbirth
Intermediate
zone
Melanocyte-stimulating
hormone
Peptide
Stimulates melanin formation in
melanocytes
TABLE 17.3
Posterior Pituitary
The posterior pituitary is actually an extension of the neurons of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the
hypothalamus. The cell bodies of these regions rest in the hypothalamus, but their axons descend as the
hypothalamic–hypophyseal tract within the infundibulum, and end in axon terminals that comprise the posterior
pituitary (Figure 17.8).
FIGURE 17.8
Posterior Pituitary
Neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus release oxytocin (OT) or ADH into the posterior lobe of the
pituitary gland. These hormones are stored or released into the blood via the capillary plexus.
The posterior pituitary gland does not produce hormones, but rather stores and secretes hormones produced by the
hypothalamus. The paraventricular nuclei produce the hormone oxytocin, whereas the supraoptic nuclei produce
ADH. These hormones travel along the axons into storage sites in the axon terminals of the posterior pituitary. In
response to signals from the same hypothalamic neurons, the hormones are released from the axon terminals into
the bloodstream.
17.3 • The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
675
Oxytocin
When fetal development is complete, the peptide-derived hormone oxytocin (tocia- = “childbirth”) stimulates
uterine contractions and dilation of the cervix. Throughout most of pregnancy, oxytocin hormone receptors are not
expressed at high levels in the uterus. Toward the end of pregnancy, the synthesis of oxytocin receptors in the
uterus increases, and the smooth muscle cells of the uterus become more sensitive to its effects. Oxytocin is
continually released throughout childbirth through a positive feedback mechanism. As noted earlier, oxytocin
prompts uterine contractions that push the fetal head toward the cervix. In response, cervical stretching stimulates
additional oxytocin to be synthesized by the hypothalamus and released from the pituitary. This increases the
intensity and effectiveness of uterine contractions and prompts additional dilation of the cervix. The feedback loop
continues until birth.
Although the high blood levels of oxytocin begin to decrease immediately following birth, oxytocin continues to play
a role in female and newborn health. First, oxytocin is necessary for the milk ejection reflex (commonly referred to
as “let-down”) in breastfeeding people. As the newborn begins suckling, sensory receptors in the nipples transmit
signals to the hypothalamus. In response, oxytocin is secreted and released into the bloodstream. Within seconds,
cells in the milk ducts contract, ejecting milk into the infant’s mouth. Secondly, in ball people, oxytocin is thought to
contribute to parent–newborn bonding, known as attachment. Oxytocin is also thought to be involved in feelings of
love and closeness, as well as in the sexual response.
Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
The solute concentration of the blood, or blood osmolarity, may change in response to the consumption of certain
foods and fluids, as well as in response to disease, injury, medications, or other factors. Blood osmolarity is
constantly monitored by osmoreceptors—specialized cells within the hypothalamus that are particularly sensitive to
the concentration of sodium ions and other solutes.
In response to high blood osmolarity, which can occur during dehydration or following a very salty meal, the
osmoreceptors signal the posterior pituitary to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The target cells of ADH are
located in the tubular cells of the kidneys. Its effect is to increase epithelial permeability to water, allowing
increased water reabsorption. The more water reabsorbed from the filtrate, the greater the amount of water that is
returned to the blood and the less that is excreted in the urine. A greater concentration of water results in a reduced
concentration of solutes. ADH is also known as vasopressin because, in very high concentrations, it causes
constriction of blood vessels, which increases blood pressure by increasing peripheral resistance. The release of
ADH is controlled by a negative feedback loop. As blood osmolarity decreases, the hypothalamic osmoreceptors
sense the change and prompt a corresponding decrease in the secretion of ADH. As a result, less water is
reabsorbed from the urine filtrate.
Interestingly, drugs can affect the secretion of ADH. For example, alcohol consumption inhibits the release of ADH,
resulting in increased urine production that can eventually lead to dehydration and a hangover. A disease called
diabetes insipidus is characterized by chronic underproduction of ADH that causes chronic dehydration. Because
little ADH is produced and secreted, not enough water is reabsorbed by the kidneys. Although patients feel thirsty,
and increase their fluid consumption, this doesn’t effectively decrease the solute concentration in their blood
because ADH levels are not high enough to trigger water reabsorption in the kidneys. Electrolyte imbalances can
occur in severe cases of diabetes insipidus.
Anterior Pituitary
The anterior pituitary originates from the digestive tract in the embryo and migrates toward the brain during fetal
development. There are three regions: the pars distalis is the most anterior, the pars intermedia is adjacent to the
posterior pituitary, and the pars tuberalis is a slender “tube” that wraps the infundibulum.
Recall that the posterior pituitary does not synthesize hormones, but merely stores them. In contrast, the anterior
pituitary does manufacture hormones. However, the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary is regulated
by two classes of hormones. These hormones—secreted by the hypothalamus—are the releasing hormones that
stimulate the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary and the inhibiting hormones that inhibit secretion.
Hypothalamic hormones are secreted by neurons, but enter the anterior pituitary through blood vessels (Figure
17.9). Within the infundibulum is a bridge of capillaries that connects the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary.
676
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
This network, called the hypophyseal portal system, allows hypothalamic hormones to be transported to the
anterior pituitary without first entering the systemic circulation. The system originates from the superior
hypophyseal artery, which branches off the carotid arteries and transports blood to the hypothalamus. The branches
of the superior hypophyseal artery form the hypophyseal portal system (see Figure 17.9). Hypothalamic releasing
and inhibiting hormones travel through a primary capillary plexus to the portal veins, which carry them into the
anterior pituitary. Hormones produced by the anterior pituitary (in response to releasing hormones) enter a
secondary capillary plexus, and from there drain into the circulation.
FIGURE 17.9
Anterior Pituitary
The anterior pituitary manufactures seven hormones. The hypothalamus produces separate hormones
that stimulate or inhibit hormone production in the anterior pituitary. Hormones from the hypothalamus reach the anterior pituitary via the
hypophyseal portal system.
The anterior pituitary produces seven hormones. These are the growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), beta
endorphin, and prolactin. Of the hormones of the anterior pituitary, TSH, ACTH, FSH, and LH are collectively referred
to as tropic hormones (trope- = “turning”) because they turn on or off the function of other endocrine glands.
Growth Hormone
The endocrine system regulates the growth of the human body, protein synthesis, and cellular replication. A major
hormone involved in this process is growth hormone (GH), also called somatotropin—a protein hormone produced
and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland. Its primary function is anabolic; it promotes protein synthesis and
tissue building through direct and indirect mechanisms (Figure 17.10). GH levels are controlled by the release of
GHRH and GHIH (also known as somatostatin) from the hypothalamus.
17.3 • The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
677
FIGURE 17.10
Hormonal Regulation of Growth
Growth hormone (GH) directly accelerates the rate of protein synthesis in skeletal
muscle and bones. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is activated by growth hormone and indirectly supports the formation of new
proteins in muscle cells and bone.
A glucose-sparing effect occurs when GH stimulates lipolysis, or the breakdown of adipose tissue, releasing fatty
acids into the blood. As a result, many tissues switch from glucose to fatty acids as their main energy source, which
means that less glucose is taken up from the bloodstream.
GH also initiates the diabetogenic effect in which GH stimulates the liver to break down glycogen to glucose, which
is then deposited into the blood. The name “diabetogenic” is derived from the similarity in elevated blood glucose
levels observed between individuals with untreated diabetes mellitus and individuals experiencing GH excess.
Blood glucose levels rise as the result of a combination of glucose-sparing and diabetogenic effects.
GH indirectly mediates growth and protein synthesis by triggering the liver and other tissues to produce a group of
proteins called insulin-like growth factors (IGFs). These proteins enhance cellular proliferation and inhibit
apoptosis, or programmed cell death. IGFs stimulate cells to increase their uptake of amino acids from the blood for
protein synthesis. Skeletal muscle and cartilage cells are particularly sensitive to stimulation from IGFs.
Dysfunction of the endocrine system’s control of growth can result in several disorders. For example, gigantism is a
disorder in children that is caused by the secretion of abnormally large amounts of GH, resulting in excessive
growth. A similar condition in adults is acromegaly, a disorder that results in the growth of bones in the face, hands,
and feet in response to excessive levels of GH in individuals who have stopped growing. Abnormally low levels of GH
in children can cause growth impairment—a disorder called pituitary dwarfism (also known as growth hormone
deficiency).
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
The activity of the thyroid gland is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), also called thyrotropin. TSH is
released from the anterior pituitary in response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus. As
678
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
discussed shortly, it triggers the secretion of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland. In a classic negative feedback
loop, elevated levels of thyroid hormones in the bloodstream then trigger a drop in production of TRH and
subsequently TSH.
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone
The adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), also called corticotropin, stimulates the adrenal cortex (the more
superficial “bark” of the adrenal glands) to secrete corticosteroid hormones such as cortisol. ACTH come from a
precursor molecule known as pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) which produces several biologically active molecules
when cleaved, including ACTH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, and the brain opioid peptides known as
endorphins.
The release of ACTH is regulated by the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus in response
to normal physiologic rhythms. A variety of stressors can also influence its release, and the role of ACTH in the
stress response is discussed later in this chapter.
Follicle-Stimulating Hormone and Luteinizing Hormone
The endocrine glands secrete a variety of hormones that control the development and regulation of the reproductive
system (these glands include the anterior pituitary, the adrenal cortex, and the gonads—the testes and the ovaries).
Much of the development of the reproductive system occurs during puberty and is marked by the development of
sex-specific characteristics in adolescents. Puberty is initiated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), a
hormone produced and secreted by the hypothalamus. GnRH stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete
gonadotropins—hormones that regulate the function of the gonads. The levels of GnRH are regulated through a
negative feedback loop; high levels of reproductive hormones inhibit the release of GnRH. Throughout life,
gonadotropins regulate reproductive function and, in the case of females, the onset and cessation of reproductive
capacity.
The gonadotropins include two glycoprotein hormones: follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates the
production and maturation of sex cells, or gametes, including ova and sperm. FSH also promotes follicular growth;
these follicles then release estrogens in ovaries. Luteinizing hormone (LH) triggers ovulation, as well as the
production of estrogens and progesterone by the ovaries. LH stimulates production of testosterone by the testes.
Prolactin
As its name implies, prolactin (PRL) promotes lactation (milk production). During pregnancy, it contributes to
development of the mammary glands, and after birth, it stimulates the mammary glands to produce breast milk.
However, the effects of prolactin depend heavily upon the permissive effects of estrogens, progesterone, and other
hormones. And as noted earlier, the let-down of milk occurs in response to stimulation from oxytocin.
In non-pregnant females, prolactin secretion is inhibited by prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH), which is actually the
neurotransmitter dopamine, and is released from neurons in the hypothalamus. Only during pregnancy do prolactin
levels rise in response to prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH) from the hypothalamus.
Intermediate Pituitary: Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone
The cells in the zone between the pituitary lobes secrete a hormone known as melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(MSH) that is formed by cleavage of the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) precursor protein. Local production of MSH in
the skin is responsible for melanin production in response to UV light exposure. The role of MSH made by the
pituitary is more complicated. For instance, people with lighter skin generally have the same amount of MSH as
people with darker skin. Nevertheless, this hormone is capable of darkening of the skin by inducing melanin
production in the skin’s melanocytes. People also show increased MSH production during pregnancy; in combination
with estrogens, it can lead to darker skin pigmentation, especially the skin of the areolas and labia minora. Figure
17.11 is a summary of the pituitary hormones and their principal effects.
17.3 • The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
679
FIGURE 17.11
Major Pituitary Hormones
Major pituitary hormones and their target organs.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/roleofhypo) to watch an animation showing the role of the hypothalamus and the
pituitary gland. Which hormone is released by the pituitary to stimulate the thyroid gland?
17.4 The Thyroid Gland
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and anatomy of the thyroid gland
•
Discuss the synthesis of triiodothyronine and thyroxine
•
Explain the role of thyroid hormones in the regulation of basal metabolism
•
Identify the hormone produced by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid
A butterfly-shaped organ, the thyroid gland is located anterior to the trachea, just inferior to the larynx (Figure
17.12). The medial region, called the isthmus, is flanked by wing-shaped left and right lobes. Each of the thyroid
lobes are embedded with parathyroid glands, primarily on their posterior surfaces. The tissue of the thyroid gland is
composed mostly of thyroid follicles. The follicles are made up of a central cavity filled with a sticky fluid called
680
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
colloid. Surrounded by a wall of epithelial follicle cells, the colloid is the center of thyroid hormone production, and
that production is dependent on the hormones’ essential and unique component: iodine.
FIGURE 17.12
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is located in the neck where it wraps around the trachea. (a) Anterior view of the
thyroid gland. (b) Posterior view of the thyroid gland. (c) The glandular tissue is composed primarily of thyroid follicles. The larger
parafollicular cells often appear within the matrix of follicle cells. LM × 1332. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
Synthesis and Release of Thyroid Hormones
Hormones are produced in the colloid when atoms of the mineral iodine attach to a glycoprotein, called
thyroglobulin, that is secreted into the colloid by the follicle cells. The following steps outline the hormones’
17.4 • The Thyroid Gland
681
assembly:
1.
Binding of TSH to its receptors in the follicle cells of the thyroid gland causes the cells to actively transport
iodide ions (I–) across their cell membrane, from the bloodstream into the cytosol. As a result, the
concentration of iodide ions “trapped” in the follicular cells is many times higher than the concentration in the
bloodstream.
2.
Iodide ions then move to the lumen of the follicle cells that border the colloid. There, the ions undergo oxidation
(their negatively charged electrons are removed). The oxidation of two iodide ions (2 I–) results in iodine (I2),
which passes through the follicle cell membrane into the colloid.
3.
In the colloid, peroxidase enzymes link the iodine to the tyrosine amino acids in thyroglobulin to produce two
intermediaries: a tyrosine attached to one iodine and a tyrosine attached to two iodines. When one of each of
these intermediaries is linked by covalent bonds, the resulting compound is triiodothyronine (T3), a thyroid
hormone with three iodines. Much more commonly, two copies of the second intermediary bond, forming
tetraiodothyronine, also known as thyroxine (T4), a thyroid hormone with four iodines.
These hormones remain in the colloid center of the thyroid follicles until TSH stimulates endocytosis of colloid back
into the follicle cells. There, lysosomal enzymes break apart the thyroglobulin colloid, releasing free T3 and T4,
which diffuse across the follicle cell membrane and enter the bloodstream.
In the bloodstream, less than one percent of the circulating T3 and T4 remains unbound. This free T3 and T4 can
cross the lipid bilayer of cell membranes and be taken up by cells. The remaining 99 percent of circulating T3 and T4
is bound to specialized transport proteins called thyroxine-binding globulins (TBGs), to albumin, or to other plasma
proteins. This “packaging” prevents their free diffusion into body cells. When blood levels of T3 and T4 begin to
decline, bound T3 and T4 are released from these plasma proteins and readily cross the membrane of target cells. T3
is more potent than T4, and many cells convert T4 to T3 through the removal of an iodine atom.
Regulation of TH Synthesis
The release of T3 and T4 from the thyroid gland is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). As shown in
Figure 17.13, low blood levels of T3 and T4 stimulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the
hypothalamus, which triggers secretion of TSH from the anterior pituitary. In turn, TSH stimulates the thyroid gland
to secrete T3 and T4. The levels of TRH, TSH, T3, and T4 are regulated by a negative feedback system in which
increasing levels of T3 and T4 decrease the production and secretion of TSH.
682
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 17.13
Classic Negative Feedback Loop
A classic negative feedback loop controls the regulation of thyroid hormone levels.
Functions of Thyroid Hormones
The thyroid hormones, T3 and T4, are often referred to as metabolic hormones because their levels influence the
body’s basal metabolic rate, the amount of energy used by the body at rest. When T3 and T4 bind to intracellular
receptors located on the mitochondria, they cause an increase in nutrient breakdown and the use of oxygen to
produce ATP. In addition, T3 and T4 initiate the transcription of genes involved in glucose oxidation. Although these
mechanisms prompt cells to produce more ATP, the process is inefficient, and an abnormally increased level of heat
is released as a byproduct of these reactions. This so-called calorigenic effect (calor- = “heat”) raises body
temperature.
Adequate levels of thyroid hormones are also required for protein synthesis and for fetal and childhood tissue
development and growth. They are especially critical for normal development of the nervous system both in utero
and in early childhood, and they continue to support neurological function in adults. As noted earlier, these thyroid
hormones have a complex interrelationship with reproductive hormones, and deficiencies can influence libido,
fertility, and other aspects of reproductive function. Finally, thyroid hormones increase the body’s sensitivity to
catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) from the adrenal medulla by upregulation of receptors in the
blood vessels. When levels of T3 and T4 hormones are excessive, this effect accelerates the heart rate, strengthens
the heartbeat, and increases blood pressure. Because thyroid hormones regulate metabolism, heat production,
protein synthesis, and many other body functions, thyroid disorders can have severe and widespread consequences.
17.4 • The Thyroid Gland
683
Calcitonin
The thyroid gland also secretes a hormone called calcitonin that is produced by the parafollicular cells (also called
C cells) that stud the tissue between distinct follicles. Calcitonin is released in response to a rise in blood calcium
Disorders of the...
Endocrine System: Iodine Deficiency, Hypothyroidism, and Hyperthyroidism
As discussed above, dietary iodine is required for the synthesis of T3 and T4. But for much of the world’s
population, foods do not provide adequate levels of this mineral, because the amount varies according to the
level in the soil in which the food was grown, as well as the irrigation and fertilizers used. Marine fish and shrimp
tend to have high levels because they concentrate iodine from seawater, but many people in landlocked regions
lack access to seafood. Thus, the primary source of dietary iodine in many countries is iodized salt. Fortification
of salt with iodine began in the United States in 1924, and international efforts to iodize salt in the world’s
poorest nations continue today.
Dietary iodine deficiency can result in the impaired ability to synthesize T3 and T4, leading to a variety of severe
disorders. When T3 and T4 cannot be produced, TSH is secreted in increasing amounts. As a result of this
hyperstimulation, thyroglobulin accumulates in the thyroid gland follicles, increasing their deposits of colloid.
The accumulation of colloid increases the overall size of the thyroid gland, a condition called a goiter (Figure
17.14). A goiter is only a visible indication of the deficiency. Other iodine deficiency disorders include impaired
growth and development, decreased fertility, and prenatal and infant death. Moreover, iodine deficiency is the
primary cause of preventable intellectual disabilies worldwide. Neonatal hypothyroidism (cretinism) is
characterized by cognitive deficits, short stature, and sometimes deafness and muteness in children and adults
born to mothers who were iodine-deficient during pregnancy.
FIGURE 17.14
Goiter
(credit: “Almazi”/Wikimedia Commons)
In areas of the world with access to iodized salt, dietary deficiency is rare. Instead, inflammation of the thyroid
gland is the more common cause of low blood levels of thyroid hormones. Called hypothyroidism, the condition
is characterized by a low metabolic rate, weight gain, cold extremities, constipation, reduced libido, menstrual
irregularities, and reduced mental activity. In contrast, hyperthyroidism—an abnormally elevated blood level of
thyroid hormones—is often caused by a pituitary or thyroid tumor. In Graves’ disease, the hyperthyroid state
results from an autoimmune reaction in which antibodies overstimulate the follicle cells of the thyroid gland.
Hyperthyroidism can lead to an increased metabolic rate, excessive body heat and sweating, diarrhea, weight
loss, tremors, and increased heart rate. The person’s eyes may bulge (called exophthalmos) as antibodies
produce inflammation in the soft tissues of the orbits. The person may also develop a goiter.
684
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
levels. It appears to have a function in decreasing blood calcium concentrations by:
•
Inhibiting the activity of osteoclasts, bone cells that release calcium into the circulation by degrading bone
matrix
•
Increasing osteoblastic activity
•
Decreasing calcium absorption in the intestines
•
Increasing calcium loss in the urine
However, these functions are usually not significant in maintaining calcium homeostasis, so the importance of
calcitonin is not entirely understood. Pharmaceutical preparations of calcitonin are sometimes prescribed to reduce
osteoclast activity in people with osteoporosis and to reduce the degradation of cartilage in people with
osteoarthritis. The hormones secreted by thyroid are summarized in Table 17.4.
Thyroid Hormones
Associated hormones
Chemical class
Effect
Thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3)
Amine
Stimulate basal metabolic rate
Calcitonin
Peptide
Reduces blood Ca2+ levels
TABLE 17.4
Of course, calcium is critical for many other biological processes. It is a second messenger in many signaling
pathways, and is essential for muscle contraction, nerve impulse transmission, and blood clotting. Given these
roles, it is not surprising that blood calcium levels are tightly regulated by the endocrine system. The organs involved
in the regulation are the parathyroid glands.
17.5 The Parathyroid Glands
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and structure of the parathyroid glands
•
Describe the hormonal control of blood calcium levels
•
Discuss the physiological response of parathyroid dysfunction
The parathyroid glands are tiny, round structures usually found embedded in the posterior surface of the thyroid
gland (Figure 17.15). A thick connective tissue capsule separates the glands from the thyroid tissue. Most people
have four parathyroid glands, but occasionally there are more in tissues of the neck or chest. The function of one
type of parathyroid cells, the oxyphil cells, is not clear. The primary functional cells of the parathyroid glands are the
chief cells. These epithelial cells produce and secrete the parathyroid hormone (PTH), the major hormone involved
in the regulation of blood calcium levels.
FIGURE 17.15
Parathyroid Glands
The small parathyroid glands are embedded in the posterior surface of the thyroid gland. LM × 760.
17.5 • The Parathyroid Glands
685
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/parathyroid) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
The parathyroid glands produce and secrete PTH, a peptide hormone, in response to low blood calcium levels
(Figure 17.16). PTH secretion causes the release of calcium from the bones by stimulating osteoclasts, which
secrete enzymes that degrade bone and release calcium into the interstitial fluid. PTH also inhibits osteoblasts, the
cells involved in bone deposition, thereby sparing blood calcium. PTH causes increased reabsorption of calcium
(and magnesium) in the kidney tubules from the urine filtrate. In addition, PTH initiates the production of the steroid
hormone calcitriol (also known as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D), which is the active form of vitamin D3, in the kidneys.
Calcitriol then stimulates increased absorption of dietary calcium by the intestines. A negative feedback loop
regulates the levels of PTH, with rising blood calcium levels inhibiting further release of PTH.
686
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 17.16
Parathyroid Hormone in Maintaining Blood Calcium Homeostasis
Parathyroid hormone increases blood calcium
levels when they drop too low. Conversely, calcitonin, which is released from the thyroid gland, decreases blood calcium levels when they
become too high. These two mechanisms constantly maintain blood calcium concentration at homeostasis.
Abnormally high activity of the parathyroid gland can cause hyperparathyroidism, a disorder caused by an
overproduction of PTH that results in excessive calcium reabsorption from bone. Hyperparathyroidism can
significantly decrease bone density, leading to spontaneous fractures or deformities. As blood calcium levels rise,
cell membrane permeability to sodium is decreased, and the responsiveness of the nervous system is reduced. At
the same time, calcium deposits may collect in the body’s tissues and organs, impairing their functioning.
In contrast, abnormally low blood calcium levels may be caused by parathyroid hormone deficiency, called
hypoparathyroidism, which may develop following injury or surgery involving the thyroid gland. Low blood calcium
increases membrane permeability to sodium, resulting in muscle twitching, cramping, spasms, or convulsions.
Severe deficits can paralyze muscles, including those involved in breathing, and can be fatal.
When blood calcium levels are high, calcitonin is produced and secreted by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid
17.5 • The Parathyroid Glands
687
gland. As discussed earlier, calcitonin inhibits the activity of osteoclasts, reduces the absorption of dietary calcium
in the intestine, and signals the kidneys to reabsorb less calcium, resulting in larger amounts of calcium excreted in
the urine.
17.6 The Adrenal Glands
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and structure of the adrenal glands
•
Identify the hormones produced by the adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla, and summarize their target cells
and effects
The adrenal glands are wedges of glandular and neuroendocrine tissue adhering to the top of the kidneys by a
fibrous capsule (Figure 17.17). The adrenal glands have a rich blood supply and experience one of the highest rates
of blood flow in the body. They are served by several arteries branching off the aorta, including the suprarenal and
renal arteries. Blood flows to each adrenal gland at the adrenal cortex and then drains into the adrenal medulla.
Adrenal hormones are released into the circulation via the left and right suprarenal veins.
FIGURE 17.17
Adrenal Glands
Both adrenal glands sit atop the kidneys and are composed of an outer cortex and an inner medulla, all
surrounded by a connective tissue capsule. The cortex can be subdivided into additional zones, all of which produce different types of
hormones. LM × 204. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/adrenal) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
The adrenal gland consists of an outer cortex of glandular tissue and an inner medulla of nervous tissue. The cortex
itself is divided into three zones: the zona glomerulosa, the zona fasciculata, and the zona reticularis. Each region
secretes its own set of hormones.
The adrenal cortex, as a component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, secretes steroid hormones
important for the regulation of the long-term stress response, blood pressure and blood volume, nutrient uptake
and storage, fluid and electrolyte balance, and inflammation. The HPA axis involves the stimulation of hormone
release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary by the hypothalamus. ACTH then stimulates the
adrenal cortex to produce the hormone cortisol. This pathway will be discussed in more detail below.
The adrenal medulla is neuroendocrine tissue composed of postganglionic sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
neurons. It is really an extension of the autonomic nervous system, which regulates homeostasis in the body. The
sympathomedullary (SAM) pathway involves the stimulation of the medulla by impulses from the hypothalamus via
neurons from the thoracic spinal cord. The medulla is stimulated to secrete the amine hormones epinephrine and
norepinephrine.
One of the major functions of the adrenal gland is to respond to stress. Stress can be either physical or psychological
or both. Physical stresses include exposing the body to injury, walking outside in cold and wet conditions without a
coat on, or malnutrition. Psychological stresses include the perception of a physical threat, a fight with a loved one,
or just a bad day at school.
The body responds in different ways to short-term stress and long-term stress following a pattern known as the
688
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
general adaptation syndrome (GAS). Stage one of GAS is called the alarm reaction. This is short-term stress, the
fight-or-flight response, mediated by the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla via
the SAM pathway. Their function is to prepare the body for extreme physical exertion. Once this stress is relieved,
the body quickly returns to normal. The section on the adrenal medulla covers this response in more detail.
If the stress is not soon relieved, the body adapts to the stress in the second stage called the stage of resistance. If
a person is starving for example, the body may send signals to the gastrointestinal tract to maximize the absorption
of nutrients from food.
If the stress continues for a longer term however, the body responds with symptoms quite different than the fight-
or-flight response. During the stage of exhaustion, individuals may begin to suffer depression, the suppression of
their immune response, severe fatigue, or even a fatal heart attack. These symptoms are mediated by the hormones
of the adrenal cortex, especially cortisol, released as a result of signals from the HPA axis.
Adrenal hormones also have several non–stress-related functions, including the increase of blood sodium and
glucose levels, which will be described in detail below.
Adrenal Cortex
The adrenal cortex consists of multiple layers of lipid-storing cells that occur in three structurally distinct regions.
Each of these regions produces different hormones.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/adrenalglands) to view an animation describing the location and function of the
adrenal glands. Which hormone produced by the adrenal glands is responsible for the mobilization of energy stores?
Hormones of the Zona Glomerulosa
The most superficial region of the adrenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa, which produces a group of hormones
collectively referred to as mineralocorticoids because of their effect on body minerals, especially sodium and
potassium. These hormones are essential for fluid and electrolyte balance.
Aldosterone is the major mineralocorticoid. It is important in the regulation of the concentration of sodium and
potassium ions in urine, sweat, and saliva. For example, it is released in response to elevated blood K+, low blood
Na+, low blood pressure, or low blood volume. In response, aldosterone increases the excretion of K+ and the
retention of Na+, which in turn increases blood volume and blood pressure. Its secretion is prompted when CRH
from the hypothalamus triggers ACTH release from the anterior pituitary.
Aldosterone is also a key component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in which specialized cells
of the kidneys secrete the enzyme renin in response to low blood volume or low blood pressure. Renin then
catalyzes the conversion of the blood protein angiotensinogen, produced by the liver, to the hormone angiotensin I.
Angiotensin I is converted in the lungs to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). Angiotensin II
has three major functions:
1.
Initiating vasoconstriction of the arterioles, decreasing blood flow
2.
Stimulating kidney tubules to reabsorb NaCl and water, increasing blood volume
3.
Signaling the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, the effects of which further contribute to fluid retention,
restoring blood pressure and blood volume
For individuals with hypertension, or high blood pressure, drugs are available that block the production of
angiotensin II. These drugs, known as ACE inhibitors, block the ACE enzyme from converting angiotensin I to
angiotensin II, thus mitigating the latter’s ability to increase blood pressure.
Hormones of the Zona Fasciculata
The intermediate region of the adrenal cortex is the zona fasciculata, named as such because the cells form small
fascicles (bundles) separated by tiny blood vessels. The cells of the zona fasciculata produce hormones called
glucocorticoids because of their role in glucose metabolism. The most important of these is cortisol, some of which
the liver converts to cortisone. A glucocorticoid produced in much smaller amounts is corticosterone. In response to
long-term stressors, the hypothalamus secretes CRH, which in turn triggers the release of ACTH by the anterior
17.6 • The Adrenal Glands
689
pituitary. ACTH triggers the release of the glucocorticoids. Their overall effect is to inhibit tissue building while
stimulating the breakdown of stored nutrients to maintain adequate fuel supplies. In conditions of long-term stress,
for example, cortisol promotes the catabolism of glycogen to glucose, the catabolism of stored triglycerides into
fatty acids and glycerol, and the catabolism of muscle proteins into amino acids. These raw materials can then be
used to synthesize additional glucose and ketones for use as body fuels. The hippocampus, which is part of the
temporal lobe of the cerebral cortices and important in memory formation, is highly sensitive to stress levels
because of its many glucocorticoid receptors.
You are probably familiar with prescription and over-the-counter medications containing glucocorticoids, such as
cortisone injections into inflamed joints, prednisone tablets and steroid-based inhalers used to manage severe
asthma, and hydrocortisone creams applied to relieve itchy rashes. These drugs reflect another role of cortisol—the
downregulation of the immune system, which inhibits the inflammatory response.
Hormones of the Zona Reticularis
The deepest region of the adrenal cortex is the zona reticularis, which produces small amounts of a class of steroid
sex hormones called androgens. During puberty and most of adulthood, androgens are produced in the gonads. The
androgens produced in the zona reticularis supplement the gonadal androgens. They are produced in response to
ACTH from the anterior pituitary and are converted in the tissues to testosterone or estrogens. In adult females,
they may contribute to the sex drive, but their function in adult males is not well understood. In post-menopausal
people, as the functions of the ovaries decline, the main source of estrogens becomes the androgens produced by
the zona reticularis.
Adrenal Medulla
As noted earlier, the adrenal cortex releases glucocorticoids in response to long-term stress such as severe illness.
In contrast, the adrenal medulla releases its hormones in response to acute, short-term stress mediated by the
sympathetic nervous system (SNS).
The medullary tissue is composed of unique postganglionic SNS neurons called chromaffin cells, which are large
and irregularly shaped, and produce the neurotransmitters epinephrine (also called adrenaline) and
norepinephrine (or noradrenaline). Epinephrine is produced in greater quantities—approximately a 4 to 1 ratio with
norepinephrine—and is the more powerful hormone. Because the chromaffin cells release epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the systemic circulation, where they travel widely and exert effects on distant cells, they are
considered hormones. Derived from the amino acid tyrosine, they are chemically classified as catecholamines.
The secretion of medullary epinephrine and norepinephrine is controlled by a neural pathway that originates from
the hypothalamus in response to danger or stress (the SAM pathway). Both epinephrine and norepinephrine signal
the liver and skeletal muscle cells to convert glycogen into glucose, resulting in increased blood glucose levels.
These hormones increase the heart rate, pulse, and blood pressure to prepare the body to fight the perceived threat
or flee from it. In addition, the pathway dilates the airways, raising blood oxygen levels. It also prompts vasodilation,
further increasing the oxygenation of important organs such as the lungs, brain, heart, and skeletal muscle. At the
same time, it triggers vasoconstriction to blood vessels serving less essential organs such as the gastrointestinal
tract, kidneys, and skin, and downregulates some components of the immune system. Other effects include a dry
mouth, loss of appetite, pupil dilation, and a loss of peripheral vision. The major hormones of the adrenal glands are
summarized in Table 17.5.
690
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Hormones of the Adrenal Glands
Adrenal gland
Associated hormones
Chemical class
Effect
Adrenal cortex
Aldosterone
Steroid
Increases blood Na+ levels
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol, corticosterone, cortisone
Steroid
Increase blood glucose levels
Adrenal medulla
Epinephrine, norepinephrine
Amine
Stimulate fight-or-flight response
TABLE 17.5
Disorders Involving the Adrenal Glands
Several disorders are caused by the dysregulation of the hormones produced by the adrenal glands. For example,
Cushing’s disease is a disorder characterized by high blood glucose levels and the accumulation of lipid deposits on
the face and neck. It is caused by hypersecretion of cortisol. The most common source of Cushing’s disease is a
pituitary tumor that secretes cortisol or ACTH in abnormally high amounts. Other common signs of Cushing’s
disease include the development of a moon-shaped face, a buffalo hump on the back of the neck, rapid weight gain,
and hair loss. Chronically elevated glucose levels are also associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2
diabetes. In addition to hyperglycemia, chronically elevated glucocorticoids compromise immunity, resistance to
infection, and memory, and can result in rapid weight gain and hair loss.
In contrast, the hyposecretion of corticosteroids can result in Addison’s disease, a rare disorder that causes low
blood glucose levels and low blood sodium levels. The signs and symptoms of Addison’s disease are vague and are
typical of other disorders as well, making diagnosis difficult. They may include general weakness, abdominal pain,
weight loss, nausea, vomiting, sweating, and cravings for salty food.
17.7 The Pineal Gland
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and structure of the pineal gland
•
Discuss the function of melatonin
Recall that the hypothalamus, part of the diencephalon of the brain, sits inferior and somewhat anterior to the
thalamus. Inferior but somewhat posterior to the thalamus is the pineal gland, a tiny endocrine gland whose
functions are not entirely clear. The pinealocyte cells that make up the pineal gland are known to produce and
secrete the amine hormone melatonin, which is derived from serotonin.
The secretion of melatonin varies according to the level of light received from the environment. When photons of
light stimulate the retinas of the eyes, a nerve impulse is sent to a region of the hypothalamus called the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which is important in regulating biological rhythms. From the SCN, the nerve signal
is carried to the spinal cord and eventually to the pineal gland, where the production of melatonin is inhibited. As a
result, blood levels of melatonin fall, promoting wakefulness. In contrast, as light levels decline—such as during the
evening—melatonin production increases, boosting blood levels and causing drowsiness.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/melatonin) to view an animation describing the function of the hormone
melatonin. What should you avoid doing in the middle of your sleep cycle that would lower melatonin?
The secretion of melatonin may influence the body’s circadian rhythms, the dark-light fluctuations that affect not
only sleepiness and wakefulness, but also appetite and body temperature. Interestingly, children have higher
melatonin levels than adults, which may prevent the release of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary, thereby
inhibiting the onset of puberty. Finally, an antioxidant role of melatonin is the subject of current research.
17.7 • The Pineal Gland
691
Jet lag occurs when a person travels across several time zones and feels sleepy during the day or wakeful at night.
Traveling across multiple time zones significantly disturbs the light-dark cycle regulated by melatonin. It can take up
to several days for melatonin synthesis to adjust to the light-dark patterns in the new environment, resulting in jet
lag. Some air travelers take melatonin supplements to induce sleep.
17.8 Gonadal and Placental Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the most important hormones produced by the testes and ovaries
•
Name the hormones produced by the placenta and state their functions
This section briefly discusses the hormonal role of the gonads—the testes and ovaries—which produce the sex cells
(sperm and ova) and secrete the gonadal hormones. The roles of the gonadotropins released from the anterior
pituitary (FSH and LH) were discussed earlier.
The primary hormone produced by the testes is testosterone, a steroid hormone important in the development of
the testicular reproductive system, the maturation of sperm cells, and the development of secondary sex
characteristics such as a deepened voice, body hair, and increased muscle mass. Interestingly, testosterone is also
produced in the ovaries, but at a much reduced level. In addition, the testes produce the peptide hormone inhibin,
which inhibits the secretion of FSH from the anterior pituitary gland. FSH stimulates spermatogenesis.
The primary hormones produced by the ovaries are estrogens, which include estradiol, estriol, and estrone.
Estrogens play an important role in a larger number of physiological processes, including the development of the
ovarian reproductive system, regulation of the menstrual cycle, the development of secondary sex characteristics
such as increased adipose tissue and the development of breast tissue, and the maintenance of pregnancy. Another
significant ovarian hormone is progesterone, which contributes to regulation of the menstrual cycle and is
important in preparing the body for pregnancy as well as maintaining pregnancy. In addition, the granulosa cells of
the ovarian follicles produce inhibin, which inhibits the secretion of FSH.During the initial stages of pregnancy, an
organ called the placenta develops within the uterus. The placenta supplies oxygen and nutrients to the fetus,
excretes waste products, and produces and secretes estrogens and progesterone. The placenta produces human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) as well. The hCG hormone promotes progesterone synthesis and reduces the
mother’s immune function to protect the fetus from immune rejection. It also secretes human placental lactogen
(hPL), which plays a role in preparing the breasts for lactation, and relaxin, which is thought to help soften and
widen the pubic symphysis in preparation for childbirth. The hormones controlling reproduction are summarized in
Table 17.6.
Reproductive Hormones
Gonad
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Testes
Testosterone
Steroid
Stimulates development of secondary sex characteristics and
sperm production
Testes
Inhibin
Protein
Inhibits FSH release from pituitary
Ovaries
Estrogens and
progesterone
Steroid
Stimulate development of secondary sex characteristics and
prepare the body for childbirth
Placenta
Human chorionic
gonadotropin
Protein
Promotes progesterone synthesis during pregnancy and inhibits
immune response against fetus
TABLE 17.6
692
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
17.9 The Endocrine Pancreas
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and structure of the pancreas, and the morphology and function of the pancreatic islets
•
Compare and contrast the functions of insulin and glucagon
The pancreas is a long, slender organ, most of which is located posterior to the bottom half of the stomach (Figure
17.18). Although it is primarily an exocrine gland, secreting a variety of digestive enzymes, the pancreas has an
endocrine function. Its pancreatic islets—clusters of cells formerly known as the islets of Langerhans—secrete the
hormones glucagon, insulin, somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide (PP).
FIGURE 17.18
Pancreas
The pancreatic exocrine function involves the acinar cells secreting digestive enzymes that are transported
into the small intestine by the pancreatic duct. Its endocrine function involves the secretion of insulin (produced by beta cells) and
glucagon (produced by alpha cells) within the pancreatic islets. These two hormones regulate the rate of glucose metabolism in the body.
The micrograph reveals pancreatic islets. LM × 760. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/pancreaticislet) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
Everyday Connection
Anabolic Steroids
The endocrine system can be exploited for illegal or unethical purposes. A prominent example of this is the use
of steroid drugs by professional athletes.
Commonly used for performance enhancement, anabolic steroids are synthetic versions of the sex hormone,
testosterone. By boosting natural levels of this hormone, athletes experience increased muscle mass. Synthetic
versions of human growth hormone are also used to build muscle mass.
The use of performance-enhancing drugs is banned by all major collegiate and professional sports organizations
in the United States because they impart an unfair advantage to athletes who take them. In addition, the drugs
can cause significant and dangerous side effects. For example, anabolic steroid use can increase cholesterol
levels, raise blood pressure, and damage the liver. Altered testosterone levels (both too low or too high) have
been implicated in causing structural damage to the heart, and increasing the risk for cardiac arrhythmias, heart
attacks, congestive heart failure, and sudden death. Paradoxically, steroids can have effects, including shriveled
testicles and enlarged breast tissue. In females, their use can cause effects such as an enlarged clitoris and
growth of facial hair. In all people, their use can promote increased aggression (commonly known as “roid-
rage”), depression, sleep disturbances, severe acne, and infertility.
17.9 • The Endocrine Pancreas
693
Cells and Secretions of the Pancreatic Islets
The pancreatic islets each contain four varieties of cells:
•
The alpha cell produces the hormone glucagon and makes up approximately 20 percent of each islet. Glucagon
plays an important role in blood glucose regulation; low blood glucose levels stimulate its release.
•
The beta cell produces the hormone insulin and makes up approximately 75 percent of each islet. Elevated
blood glucose levels stimulate the release of insulin.
•
The delta cell accounts for four percent of the islet cells and secretes the peptide hormone somatostatin.
Recall that somatostatin is also released by the hypothalamus (as GHIH), and the stomach and intestines also
secrete it. An inhibiting hormone, pancreatic somatostatin inhibits the release of both glucagon and insulin.
•
The PP cell accounts for about one percent of islet cells and secretes the pancreatic polypeptide hormone. It is
thought to play a role in appetite, as well as in the regulation of pancreatic exocrine and endocrine secretions.
Pancreatic polypeptide released following a meal may reduce further food consumption; however, it is also
released in response to fasting.
Regulation of Blood Glucose Levels by Insulin and Glucagon
Glucose is required for cellular respiration and is the preferred fuel for all body cells. The body derives glucose from
the breakdown of the carbohydrate-containing foods and drinks we consume. Glucose not immediately taken up by
cells for fuel can be stored by the liver and muscles as glycogen, or converted to triglycerides and stored in the
adipose tissue. Hormones regulate both the storage and the utilization of glucose as required. Receptors located in
the pancreas sense blood glucose levels, and subsequently the pancreatic cells secrete glucagon or insulin to
maintain normal levels.
Glucagon
Receptors in the pancreas can sense the decline in blood glucose levels, such as during periods of fasting or during
prolonged labor or exercise (Figure 17.19). In response, the alpha cells of the pancreas secrete the hormone
glucagon, which has several effects:
•
It stimulates the liver to convert its stores of glycogen back into glucose. This response is known as
glycogenolysis. The glucose is then released into the circulation for use by body cells.
•
It stimulates the liver to take up amino acids from the blood and convert them into glucose. This response is
known as gluconeogenesis.
•
It stimulates lipolysis, the breakdown of stored triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol. Some of the free
glycerol released into the bloodstream travels to the liver, which converts it into glucose. This is also a form of
gluconeogenesis.
Taken together, these actions increase blood glucose levels. The activity of glucagon is regulated through a negative
feedback mechanism; rising blood glucose levels inhibit further glucagon production and secretion.
694
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 17.19
Homeostatic Regulation of Blood Glucose Levels
Blood glucose concentration is tightly maintained between 70 mg/
dL and 110 mg/dL. If blood glucose concentration rises above this range, insulin is released, which stimulates body cells to remove glucose
from the blood. If blood glucose concentration drops below this range, glucagon is released, which stimulates body cells to release glucose
into the blood.
Insulin
The primary function of insulin is to facilitate the uptake of glucose into body cells. Red blood cells, as well as cells
of the brain, liver, kidneys, and the lining of the small intestine, do not have insulin receptors on their cell
membranes and do not require insulin for glucose uptake. Although all other body cells do require insulin if they are
17.9 • The Endocrine Pancreas
695
to take glucose from the bloodstream, skeletal muscle cells and adipose cells are the primary targets of insulin.
The presence of food in the intestine triggers the release of gastrointestinal tract hormones such as glucose-
dependent insulinotropic peptide (previously known as gastric inhibitory peptide). This is in turn the initial trigger for
insulin production and secretion by the beta cells of the pancreas. Once nutrient absorption occurs, the resulting
surge in blood glucose levels further stimulates insulin secretion.
Precisely how insulin facilitates glucose uptake is not entirely clear. However, insulin appears to activate a tyrosine
kinase receptor, triggering the phosphorylation of many substrates within the cell. These multiple biochemical
reactions converge to support the movement of intracellular vesicles containing facilitative glucose transporters to
the cell membrane. In the absence of insulin, these transport proteins are normally recycled slowly between the cell
membrane and cell interior. Insulin triggers the rapid movement of a pool of glucose transporter vesicles to the cell
membrane, where they fuse and expose the glucose transporters to the extracellular fluid. The transporters then
move glucose by facilitated diffusion into the cell interior.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/pancreas1) to view an animation describing the location and function of the
pancreas. What goes wrong in the function of insulin in type 2 diabetes?
Insulin also reduces blood glucose levels by stimulating glycolysis, the metabolism of glucose for generation of ATP.
Moreover, it stimulates the liver to convert excess glucose into glycogen for storage, and it inhibits enzymes involved
in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Finally, insulin promotes triglyceride and protein synthesis. The secretion of
insulin is regulated through a negative feedback mechanism. As blood glucose levels decrease, further insulin
release is inhibited. The pancreatic hormones are summarized in Table 17.7.
Hormones of the Pancreas
Associated hormones
Chemical class
Effect
Insulin (beta cells)
Protein
Reduces blood glucose levels
Glucagon (alpha cells)
Protein
Increases blood glucose levels
Somatostatin (delta cells)
Protein
Inhibits insulin and glucagon release
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP cells)
Protein
Role in appetite
TABLE 17.7
Disorders of the...
Endocrine System: Diabetes Mellitus
Dysfunction of insulin production and secretion, as well as the target cells’ responsiveness to insulin, can lead to
a condition called diabetes mellitus. An increasingly common disease, diabetes mellitus has been diagnosed in
more than 18 million adults in the United States, and more than 200,000 children. It is estimated that up to 7
million more adults have the condition but have not been diagnosed. In addition, approximately 79 million
people in the US are estimated to have pre-diabetes, a condition in which blood glucose levels are abnormally
high, but not yet high enough to be classified as diabetes.
There are two main forms of diabetes mellitus. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease affecting the beta
cells of the pancreas. Certain genes are recognized to increase susceptibility. The beta cells of people with type
1 diabetes do not produce insulin; thus, synthetic insulin must be administered by injection or infusion. This
form of diabetes accounts for less than five percent of all diabetes cases.
696
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/insulin) to view an animation describing the role of insulin and the pancreas in
diabetes.
17.10 Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the organs with a secondary endocrine function, the hormone they produce, and its effects
In your study of anatomy and physiology, you have already encountered a few of the many organs of the body that
have secondary endocrine functions. Here, you will learn about the hormone-producing activities of the heart,
gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, skeleton, adipose tissue, skin, and thymus.
Heart
When the body experiences an increase in blood volume or pressure, the cells of the heart’s atrial wall stretch. In
response, specialized cells in the wall of the atria produce and secrete the peptide hormone atrial natriuretic
Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 95 percent of all cases. It is acquired, and lifestyle factors such as
poor diet, inactivity, and the presence of pre-diabetes greatly increase a person’s risk. About 80 to 90 percent of
people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese. In type 2 diabetes, cells become resistant to the effects of
insulin. In response, the pancreas increases its insulin secretion, but over time, the beta cells become
exhausted. In many cases, type 2 diabetes can be reversed by moderate weight loss, regular physical activity,
and consumption of a healthy diet; however, if blood glucose levels cannot be controlled, the person with
diabetes will eventually require insulin.
Two of the early manifestations of diabetes are excessive urination and excessive thirst. They demonstrate how
the out-of-control levels of glucose in the blood affect kidney function. The kidneys are responsible for filtering
glucose from the blood. Excessive blood glucose draws water into the urine, and as a result the person
eliminates an abnormally large quantity of sweet urine. The use of body water to dilute the urine leaves the body
dehydrated, and so the person is unusually and continually thirsty. The person may also experience persistent
hunger because the body cells are unable to access the glucose in the bloodstream.
Over time, persistently high levels of glucose in the blood injure tissues throughout the body, especially those of
the blood vessels and nerves. Inflammation and injury of the lining of arteries lead to atherosclerosis and an
increased risk of heart attack and stroke. Damage to the microscopic blood vessels of the kidney impairs kidney
function and can lead to kidney failure. Damage to blood vessels that serve the eyes can lead to blindness.
Blood vessel damage also reduces circulation to the limbs, whereas nerve damage leads to a loss of sensation,
called neuropathy, particularly in the hands and feet. Together, these changes increase the risk of injury,
infection, and tissue death (necrosis), contributing to a high rate of toe, foot, and lower leg amputations in
people with diabetes. Uncontrolled diabetes can also lead to a dangerous form of metabolic acidosis called
ketoacidosis. Deprived of glucose, cells increasingly rely on fat stores for fuel. However, in a glucose-deficient
state, the liver is forced to use an alternative lipid metabolism pathway that results in the increased production
of ketone bodies (or ketones), which are acidic. The build-up of ketones in the blood causes ketoacidosis,
which—if left untreated—may lead to a life-threatening “diabetic coma.” Together, these complications make
diabetes the seventh leading cause of death in the United States.
Diabetes is diagnosed when lab tests reveal that blood glucose levels are higher than normal, a condition called
hyperglycemia. The treatment of diabetes depends on the type, the severity of the condition, and the ability of
the patient to make lifestyle changes. As noted earlier, moderate weight loss, regular physical activity, and
consumption of a healthful diet can reduce blood glucose levels. Some patients with type 2 diabetes may be
unable to control their disease with these lifestyle changes, and will require medication. Historically, the first-
line treatment of type 2 diabetes was insulin. Research advances have resulted in alternative options, including
medications that enhance pancreatic function.
17.10 • Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
697
peptide (ANP). ANP signals the kidneys to reduce sodium reabsorption, thereby decreasing the amount of water
reabsorbed from the urine filtrate and reducing blood volume. Other actions of ANP include the inhibition of renin
secretion, thus inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and vasodilation. Therefore, ANP aids
in decreasing blood pressure, blood volume, and blood sodium levels.
Gastrointestinal Tract
The endocrine cells of the GI tract are located in the mucosa of the stomach and small intestine. Some of these
hormones are secreted in response to eating a meal and aid in digestion. An example of a hormone secreted by the
stomach cells is gastrin, a peptide hormone secreted in response to stomach distention that stimulates the release
of hydrochloric acid. Secretin is a peptide hormone secreted by the small intestine as acidic chyme (partially
digested food and fluid) moves from the stomach. It stimulates the release of bicarbonate from the pancreas, which
buffers the acidic chyme, and inhibits the further secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach. Cholecystokinin
(CCK) is another peptide hormone released from the small intestine. It promotes the secretion of pancreatic
enzymes and the release of bile from the gallbladder, both of which facilitate digestion. Other hormones produced
by the intestinal cells aid in glucose metabolism, such as by stimulating the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin,
reducing glucagon secretion from the alpha cells, or enhancing cellular sensitivity to insulin.
Kidneys
The kidneys participate in several complex endocrine pathways and produce certain hormones. A decline in blood
flow to the kidneys stimulates them to release the enzyme renin, triggering the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
(RAAS) system, and stimulating the reabsorption of sodium and water. The reabsorption increases blood flow and
blood pressure. The kidneys also play a role in regulating blood calcium levels through the production of calcitriol
from vitamin D3, which is released in response to the secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH). In addition, the
kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin (EPO) in response to low oxygen levels. EPO stimulates the
production of red blood cells (erythrocytes) in the bone marrow, thereby increasing oxygen delivery to tissues. You
may have heard of EPO as a performance-enhancing drug (in a synthetic form).
Skeleton
Although bone has long been recognized as a target for hormones, only recently have researchers recognized that
the skeleton itself produces at least two hormones. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is produced by bone cells in
response to increased blood levels of vitamin D3 or phosphate. It triggers the kidneys to inhibit the formation of
calcitriol from vitamin D3 and to increase phosphorus excretion. Osteocalcin, produced by osteoblasts, stimulates
the pancreatic beta cells to increase insulin production. It also acts on peripheral tissues to increase their sensitivity
to insulin and their utilization of glucose.
Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue produces and secretes several hormones involved in lipid metabolism and storage. One important
example is leptin, a protein manufactured by adipose cells that circulates in amounts directly proportional to levels
of body fat. Leptin is released in response to food consumption and acts by binding to brain neurons involved in
energy intake and expenditure. Binding of leptin produces a feeling of satiety after a meal, thereby reducing
appetite. It also appears that the binding of leptin to brain receptors triggers the sympathetic nervous system to
regulate bone metabolism, increasing deposition of cortical bone. Adiponectin—another hormone synthesized by
adipose cells—appears to reduce cellular insulin resistance and to protect blood vessels from inflammation and
atherosclerosis. Its levels are lower in people who are obese, and rise following weight loss.
Skin
The skin functions as an endocrine organ in the production of the inactive form of vitamin D3, cholecalciferol. When
cholesterol present in the epidermis is exposed to ultraviolet radiation, it is converted to cholecalciferol, which then
enters the blood. In the liver, cholecalciferol is converted to an intermediate that travels to the kidneys and is further
converted to calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D3. Vitamin D is important in a variety of physiological processes,
including intestinal calcium absorption and immune system function. In some studies, low levels of vitamin D have
been associated with increased risks of cancer, severe asthma, and multiple sclerosis. Vitamin D deficiency in
children causes rickets, and in adults, osteomalacia—both of which are characterized by bone deterioration.
698
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Thymus
The thymus is an organ of the immune system that is larger and more active during infancy and early childhood, and
begins to atrophy as we age. Its endocrine function is the production of a group of hormones called thymosins that
contribute to the development and differentiation of T lymphocytes, which are immune cells. Although the role of
thymosins is not yet well understood, it is clear that they contribute to the immune response. Thymosins have been
found in tissues other than the thymus and have a wide variety of functions, so the thymosins cannot be strictly
categorized as thymic hormones.
Liver
The liver is responsible for secreting at least four important hormones or hormone precursors: insulin-like growth
factor (somatomedin), angiotensinogen, thrombopoietin, and hepcidin. Insulin-like growth factor-1 is the immediate
stimulus for growth in the body, especially of the bones. Angiotensinogen is the precursor to angiotensin, mentioned
earlier, which increases blood pressure. Thrombopoietin stimulates the production of the blood’s platelets.
Hepcidins block the release of iron from cells in the body, helping to regulate iron homeostasis in our body fluids.
The major hormones of these other organs are summarized in Table 17.8.
Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions and Their Major Hormones
Organ
Major hormones
Effects
Heart
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
Reduces blood volume, blood pressure, and
Na+ concentration
Gastrointestinal
tract
Gastrin, secretin, and cholecystokinin
Aid digestion of food and buffering of
stomach acids
Gastrointestinal
tract
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide
(GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)
Stimulate beta cells of the pancreas to
release insulin
Kidneys
Renin
Stimulates release of aldosterone
Kidneys
Calcitriol
Aids in the absorption of Ca2+
Kidneys
Erythropoietin
Triggers the formation of red blood cells in
the bone marrow
Skeleton
FGF23
Inhibits production of calcitriol and increases
phosphate excretion
Skeleton
Osteocalcin
Increases insulin production
Adipose tissue
Leptin
Promotes satiety signals in the brain
Adipose tissue
Adiponectin
Reduces insulin resistance
Skin
Cholecalciferol
Modified to form vitamin D
Thymus (and
other organs)
Thymosins
Among other things, aids in the development
of T lymphocytes of the immune system
TABLE 17.8
17.10 • Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
699
Organ
Major hormones
Effects
Liver
Insulin-like growth factor-1
Stimulates bodily growth
Liver
Angiotensinogen
Raises blood pressure
Liver
Thrombopoietin
Causes increase in platelets
Liver
Hepcidin
Blocks release of iron into body fluids
TABLE 17.8
17.11 Development and Aging of the Endocrine System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the embryonic origins of the endocrine system
•
Discuss the effects of aging on the endocrine system
The endocrine system arises from all three embryonic germ layers. The endocrine glands that produce the steroid
hormones, such as the gonads and adrenal cortex, arise from the mesoderm. In contrast, endocrine glands that
arise from the endoderm and ectoderm produce the amine, peptide, and protein hormones. The pituitary gland
arises from two distinct areas of the ectoderm: the anterior pituitary gland arises from the oral ectoderm, whereas
the posterior pituitary gland arises from the neural ectoderm at the base of the hypothalamus. The pineal gland also
arises from the ectoderm. The two structures of the adrenal glands arise from two different germ layers: the adrenal
cortex from the mesoderm and the adrenal medulla from ectoderm neural cells. The endoderm gives rise to the
thyroid and parathyroid glands, as well as the pancreas and the thymus.
As the body ages, changes occur that affect the endocrine system, sometimes altering the production, secretion,
and catabolism of hormones. For example, the structure of the anterior pituitary gland changes as vascularization
decreases and the connective tissue content increases with increasing age. This restructuring affects the gland’s
hormone production. For example, the amount of human growth hormone that is produced declines with age,
resulting in the reduced muscle mass commonly observed in the elderly.
The adrenal glands also undergo changes as the body ages; as fibrous tissue increases, the production of cortisol
and aldosterone decreases. Interestingly, the production and secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine remain
normal throughout the aging process.
A well-known example of the aging process affecting an endocrine gland is menopause and the decline of ovarian
function. With increasing age, the ovaries decrease in both size and weight and become progressively less sensitive
to gonadotropins. This gradually causes a decrease in estrogen and progesterone levels, leading to menopause and
the inability to reproduce. Low levels of estrogens and progesterone are also associated with some disease states,
such as osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, and hyperlipidemia, or abnormal blood lipid levels.
Testosterone levels also decline with age, a condition called andropause (or viropause); however, this decline is
much less dramatic than the decline of estrogens, and much more gradual, rarely affecting sperm production until
very old age. Although this means that males maintain their ability to produce offspring for decades longer than
females, the quantity, quality, and motility of their sperm is often reduced.
As the body ages, the thyroid gland produces less of the thyroid hormones, causing a gradual decrease in the basal
metabolic rate. The lower metabolic rate reduces the production of body heat and increases levels of body fat.
Parathyroid hormones, on the other hand, increase with age. This may be because of reduced dietary calcium levels,
causing a compensatory increase in parathyroid hormone. However, increased parathyroid hormone levels
combined with decreased levels of calcitonin (and estrogens in females) can lead to osteoporosis as PTH stimulates
demineralization of bones to increase blood calcium levels. Notice that osteoporosis is common in all elderly people
regardless of sex.
700
17 • The Endocrine System
Access for free at openstax.org
Increasing age also affects glucose metabolism, as blood glucose levels spike more rapidly and take longer to return
to normal in the elderly. In addition, increasing glucose intolerance may occur because of a gradual decline in
cellular insulin sensitivity. Almost 27 percent of Americans aged 65 and older have diabetes.
17.11 • Development and Aging of the Endocrine System
701
Key Terms
acromegaly
disorder in adults caused when
abnormally high levels of GH trigger growth of bones
in the face, hands, and feet
adenylyl cyclase
membrane-bound enzyme that
converts ATP to cyclic AMP, creating cAMP, as a
result of G-protein activation
adrenal cortex
outer region of the adrenal glands
consisting of multiple layers of epithelial cells and
capillary networks that produces mineralocorticoids
and glucocorticoids
adrenal glands
endocrine glands located at the top
of each kidney that are important for the regulation
of the stress response, blood pressure and blood
volume, water homeostasis, and electrolyte levels
adrenal medulla
inner layer of the adrenal glands
that plays an important role in the stress response
by producing epinephrine and norepinephrine
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
anterior
pituitary hormone that stimulates the adrenal cortex
to secrete corticosteroid hormones (also called
corticotropin)
alarm reaction
the short-term stress, or the fight-or-
flight response, of stage one of the general
adaptation syndrome mediated by the hormones
epinephrine and norepinephrine
aldosterone
hormone produced and secreted by the
adrenal cortex that stimulates sodium and fluid
retention and increases blood volume and blood
pressure
alpha cell
pancreatic islet cell type that produces the
hormone glucagon
angiotensin-converting enzyme
the enzyme that
converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II
antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
hypothalamic hormone
that is stored by the posterior pituitary and that
signals the kidneys to reabsorb water
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
peptide hormone
produced by the walls of the atria in response to
high blood pressure, blood volume, or blood sodium
that reduces the reabsorption of sodium and water
in the kidneys and promotes vasodilation
autocrine
chemical signal that elicits a response in
the same cell that secreted it
beta cell
pancreatic islet cell type that produces the
hormone insulin
calcitonin
peptide hormone produced and secreted
by the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid
gland that functions to decrease blood calcium
levels
chromaffin
neuroendocrine cells of the adrenal
medulla
colloid
viscous fluid in the central cavity of thyroid
follicles, containing the glycoprotein thyroglobulin
cortisol
glucocorticoid important in gluconeogenesis,
the catabolism of glycogen, and downregulation of
the immune system
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
second
messenger that, in response to adenylyl cyclase
activation, triggers a phosphorylation cascade
delta cell
minor cell type in the pancreas that
secretes the hormone somatostatin
diabetes mellitus
condition caused by destruction or
dysfunction of the beta cells of the pancreas or
cellular resistance to insulin that results in
abnormally high blood glucose levels
diacylglycerol (DAG)
molecule that, like cAMP,
activates protein kinases, thereby initiating a
phosphorylation cascade
downregulation
decrease in the number of hormone
receptors, typically in response to chronically
excessive levels of a hormone
endocrine gland
tissue or organ that secretes
hormones into the blood and lymph without ducts
such that they may be transported to organs distant
from the site of secretion
endocrine system
cells, tissues, and organs that
secrete hormones as a primary or secondary
function and play an integral role in normal bodily
processes
epinephrine
primary and most potent catecholamine
hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla in
response to short-term stress; also called
adrenaline
erythropoietin (EPO)
protein hormone secreted in
response to low oxygen levels that triggers the bone
marrow to produce red blood cells
estrogens
class of predominantly female sex
hormones important for the development and
growth of the female reproductive tract, secondary
sex characteristics, the female reproductive cycle,
and the maintenance of pregnancy
exocrine system
cells, tissues, and organs that
secrete substances directly to target tissues via
glandular ducts
first messenger
hormone that binds to a cell
membrane hormone receptor and triggers activation
of a second messenger system
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
anterior pituitary
hormone that stimulates the production and
maturation of sex cells
G protein
protein associated with a cell membrane
hormone receptor that initiates the next step in a
second messenger system upon activation by
hormone–receptor binding
702
17 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
general adaptation syndrome (GAS)
the human
body’s three-stage response pattern to short- and
long-term stress
gigantism
disorder in children caused when
abnormally high levels of GH prompt excessive
growth
glucagon
pancreatic hormone that stimulates the
catabolism of glycogen to glucose, thereby
increasing blood glucose levels
glucocorticoids
hormones produced by the zona
fasciculata of the adrenal cortex that influence
glucose metabolism
goiter
enlargement of the thyroid gland either as a
result of iodine deficiency or hyperthyroidism
gonadotropins
hormones that regulate the function
of the gonads
growth hormone (GH)
anterior pituitary hormone
that promotes tissue building and influences
nutrient metabolism (also called somatotropin)
hormone
secretion of an endocrine organ that travels
via the bloodstream or lymphatics to induce a
response in target cells or tissues in another part of
the body
hormone receptor
protein within a cell or on the cell
membrane that binds a hormone, initiating the
target cell response
hyperglycemia
abnormally high blood glucose levels
hyperparathyroidism
disorder caused by
overproduction of PTH that results in abnormally
elevated blood calcium
hyperthyroidism
clinically abnormal, elevated level
of thyroid hormone in the blood; characterized by an
increased metabolic rate, excess body heat,
sweating, diarrhea, weight loss, and increased heart
rate
hypoparathyroidism
disorder caused by
underproduction of PTH that results in abnormally
low blood calcium
hypophyseal portal system
network of blood vessels
that enables hypothalamic hormones to travel into
the anterior lobe of the pituitary without entering
the systemic circulation
hypothalamus
region of the diencephalon inferior to
the thalamus that functions in neural and endocrine
signaling
hypothyroidism
clinically abnormal, low level of
thyroid hormone in the blood; characterized by low
metabolic rate, weight gain, cold extremities,
constipation, and reduced mental activity
infundibulum
stalk containing vasculature and neural
tissue that connects the pituitary gland to the
hypothalamus (also called the pituitary stalk)
inhibin
hormone secreted by the male and female
gonads that inhibits FSH production by the anterior
pituitary
inositol triphosphate (IP3)
molecule that initiates
the release of calcium ions from intracellular stores
insulin
pancreatic hormone that enhances the
cellular uptake and utilization of glucose, thereby
decreasing blood glucose levels
insulin-like growth factors (IGF)
protein that
enhances cellular proliferation, inhibits apoptosis,
and stimulates the cellular uptake of amino acids for
protein synthesis
leptin
protein hormone secreted by adipose tissues
in response to food consumption that promotes
satiety
luteinizing hormone (LH)
anterior pituitary hormone
that triggers ovulation and the production of ovarian
hormones, and the production of testosterone
melatonin
amino acid–derived hormone that is
secreted in response to low light and causes
drowsiness
mineralocorticoids
hormones produced by the zona
glomerulosa cells of the adrenal cortex that
influence fluid and electrolyte balance
neonatal hypothyroidism
condition characterized by
cognitive deficits, short stature, and other signs and
symptoms in people born to people who were
iodine-deficient during pregnancy
norepinephrine
secondary catecholamine hormone
secreted by the adrenal medulla in response to
short-term stress; also called noradrenaline
osmoreceptor
hypothalamic sensory receptor that is
stimulated by changes in solute concentration
(osmotic pressure) in the blood
oxytocin
hypothalamic hormone stored in the
posterior pituitary gland and important in
stimulating uterine contractions in labor, milk
ejection during breastfeeding, and feelings of
attachment (produced by males and females)
pancreas
organ with both exocrine and endocrine
functions located posterior to the stomach that is
important for digestion and the regulation of blood
glucose
pancreatic islets
specialized clusters of pancreatic
cells that have endocrine functions; also called
islets of Langerhans
paracrine
chemical signal that elicits a response in
neighboring cells; also called paracrine factor
parathyroid glands
small, round glands embedded in
the posterior thyroid gland that produce parathyroid
hormone (PTH)
parathyroid hormone (PTH)
peptide hormone
produced and secreted by the parathyroid glands in
response to low blood calcium levels
17 • Key Terms
703
phosphodiesterase (PDE)
cytosolic enzyme that
deactivates and degrades cAMP
phosphorylation cascade
signaling event in which
multiple protein kinases phosphorylate the next
protein substrate by transferring a phosphate group
from ATP to the protein
pineal gland
endocrine gland that secretes
melatonin, which is important in regulating the
sleep-wake cycle
pinealocyte
cell of the pineal gland that produces
and secretes the hormone melatonin
pituitary dwarfism
disorder in children caused when
abnormally low levels of GH result in growth
retardation
pituitary gland
bean-sized organ suspended from the
hypothalamus that produces, stores, and secretes
hormones in response to hypothalamic stimulation
(also called hypophysis)
PP cell
minor cell type in the pancreas that secretes
the hormone pancreatic polypeptide
progesterone
predominantly female sex hormone
important in regulating the female reproductive
cycle and the maintenance of pregnancy
prolactin (PRL)
anterior pituitary hormone that
promotes development of the mammary glands and
the production of breast milk
protein kinase
enzyme that initiates a
phosphorylation cascade upon activation
second messenger
molecule that initiates a signaling
cascade in response to hormone binding on a cell
membrane receptor and activation of a G protein
stage of exhaustion
stage three of the general
adaptation syndrome; the body’s long-term
response to stress mediated by the hormones of the
adrenal cortex
stage of resistance
stage two of the general
adaptation syndrome; the body’s continued
response to stress after stage one diminishes
testosterone
steroid hormone secreted by the testes
and important in the maturation of sperm cells,
growth and development of the reproductive
system, and the development of secondary sex
characteristics
thymosins
hormones produced and secreted by the
thymus that play an important role in the
development and differentiation of T cells
thymus
organ that is involved in the development and
maturation of T-cells and is particularly active
during infancy and childhood
thyroid gland
large endocrine gland responsible for
the synthesis of thyroid hormones
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
anterior
pituitary hormone that triggers secretion of thyroid
hormones by the thyroid gland (also called
thyrotropin)
thyroxine
(also, tetraiodothyronine, T4) amino
acid–derived thyroid hormone that is more
abundant but less potent than T3 and often
converted to T3 by target cells
triiodothyronine
(also, T3) amino acid–derived
thyroid hormone that is less abundant but more
potent than T4
upregulation
increase in the number of hormone
receptors, typically in response to chronically
reduced levels of a hormone
zona fasciculata
intermediate region of the adrenal
cortex that produce hormones called
glucocorticoids
zona glomerulosa
most superficial region of the
adrenal cortex, which produces the hormones
collectively referred to as mineralocorticoids
zona reticularis
deepest region of the adrenal cortex,
which produces the steroid sex hormones called
androgens
Chapter Review
17.1 An Overview of the Endocrine System
The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and
organs that secrete hormones critical to homeostasis.
The body coordinates its functions through two major
types of communication: neural and endocrine. Neural
communication includes both electrical and chemical
signaling between neurons and target cells. Endocrine
communication involves chemical signaling via the
release of hormones into the extracellular fluid. From
there, hormones diffuse into the bloodstream and may
travel to distant body regions, where they elicit a
response in target cells. Endocrine glands are ductless
glands that secrete hormones. Many organs of the body
with other primary functions—such as the heart,
stomach, and kidneys—also have hormone-secreting
cells.
17.2 Hormones
Hormones are derived from amino acids or lipids.
Amine hormones originate from the amino acids
tryptophan or tyrosine. Larger amino acid hormones
include peptides and protein hormones. Steroid
hormones are derived from cholesterol.
Steroid hormones and thyroid hormone are lipid
soluble. All other amino acid–derived hormones are
water soluble. Hydrophobic hormones are able to
diffuse through the membrane and interact with an
intracellular receptor. In contrast, hydrophilic
704
17 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
hormones must interact with cell membrane receptors.
These are typically associated with a G protein, which
becomes activated when the hormone binds the
receptor. This initiates a signaling cascade that involves
a second messenger, such as cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP). Second messenger systems
greatly amplify the hormone signal, creating a broader,
more efficient, and faster response.
Hormones are released upon stimulation that is of
either chemical or neural origin. Regulation of hormone
release is primarily achieved through negative
feedback. Various stimuli may cause the release of
hormones, but there are three major types. Humoral
stimuli are changes in ion or nutrient levels in the
blood. Hormonal stimuli are changes in hormone levels
that initiate or inhibit the secretion of another
hormone. Finally, a neural stimulus occurs when a
nerve impulse prompts the secretion or inhibition of a
hormone.
17.3 The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus–pituitary complex is located in the
diencephalon of the brain. The hypothalamus and the
pituitary gland are connected by a structure called the
infundibulum, which contains vasculature and nerve
axons. The pituitary gland is divided into two distinct
structures with different embryonic origins. The
posterior lobe houses the axon terminals of
hypothalamic neurons. It stores and releases into the
bloodstream two hypothalamic hormones: oxytocin
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The anterior lobe is
connected to the hypothalamus by vasculature in the
infundibulum and produces and secretes six
hormones. Their secretion is regulated, however, by
releasing and inhibiting hormones from the
hypothalamus. The six anterior pituitary hormones are:
growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH),
and prolactin (PRL).
17.4 The Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ located in
the neck anterior to the trachea. Its hormones regulate
basal metabolism, oxygen use, nutrient metabolism,
the production of ATP, and calcium homeostasis. They
also contribute to protein synthesis and the normal
growth and development of body tissues, including
maturation of the nervous system, and they increase
the body’s sensitivity to catecholamines. The thyroid
hormones triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are
produced and secreted by the thyroid gland in
response to thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from
the anterior pituitary. Synthesis of the amino
acid–derived T3 and T4 hormones requires iodine.
Insufficient amounts of iodine in the diet can lead to
goiter, cretinism, and many other disorders.
17.5 The Parathyroid Glands
Calcium is required for a variety of important
physiologic processes, including neuromuscular
functioning; thus, blood calcium levels are closely
regulated. The parathyroid glands are small structures
located on the posterior thyroid gland that produce
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which regulates blood
calcium levels. Low blood calcium levels cause the
production and secretion of PTH. In contrast, elevated
blood calcium levels inhibit secretion of PTH and
trigger secretion of the thyroid hormone calcitonin.
Underproduction of PTH can result in
hypoparathyroidism. In contrast, overproduction of
PTH can result in hyperparathyroidism.
17.6 The Adrenal Glands
The adrenal glands, located superior to each kidney,
consist of two regions: the adrenal cortex and adrenal
medulla. The adrenal cortex—the outer layer of the
gland—produces mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids,
and androgens. The adrenal medulla at the core of the
gland produces epinephrine and norepinephrine.
The adrenal glands mediate a short-term stress
response and a long-term stress response. A perceived
threat results in the secretion of epinephrine and
norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla, which
mediate the fight-or-flight response. The long-term
stress response is mediated by the secretion of CRH
from the hypothalamus, which triggers ACTH, which in
turn stimulates the secretion of corticosteroids from
the adrenal cortex. The mineralocorticoids, chiefly
aldosterone, cause sodium and fluid retention, which
increases blood volume and blood pressure.
17.7 The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland is an endocrine structure of the
diencephalon of the brain, and is located inferior and
posterior to the thalamus. It is made up of
pinealocytes. These cells produce and secrete the
hormone melatonin in response to low light levels.
High blood levels of melatonin induce drowsiness. Jet
lag, caused by traveling across several time zones,
occurs because melatonin synthesis takes several days
to readjust to the light-dark patterns in the new
environment.
17 • Chapter Review
705
17.8 Gonadal and Placental Hormones
The reproductive system is regulated by follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone
(LH) produced by the anterior lobe of the pituitary
gland in response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) from the hypothalamus. FSH stimulates sperm
maturation, which is inhibited by the hormone inhibin.
The steroid hormone testosterone, a type of androgen,
is released in response to LH and is responsible for the
maturation and maintenance of the testicular
reproductive system, as well as the development of
secondary sex characteristics. FSH also promotes egg
maturation and LH signals the secretion of the sex
hormones, the estrogens and progesterone. Both of
these hormones are important in the development and
maintenance of the ovarian reproductive system, as
well as maintaining pregnancy. The placenta develops
during early pregnancy, and secretes several hormones
important for maintaining the pregnancy.
17.9 The Endocrine Pancreas
The pancreas has both exocrine and endocrine
functions. The pancreatic islet cell types include alpha
cells, which produce glucagon; beta cells, which
produce insulin; delta cells, which produce
somatostatin; and PP cells, which produce pancreatic
polypeptide. Insulin and glucagon are involved in the
regulation of glucose metabolism. Insulin is produced
by the beta cells in response to high blood glucose
levels. It enhances glucose uptake and utilization by
target cells, as well as the storage of excess glucose for
later use. Dysfunction of the production of insulin or
target cell resistance to the effects of insulin causes
diabetes mellitus, a disorder characterized by high
blood glucose levels. The hormone glucagon is
produced and secreted by the alpha cells of the
pancreas in response to low blood glucose levels.
Glucagon stimulates mechanisms that increase blood
glucose levels, such as the catabolism of glycogen into
glucose.
17.10 Organs with Secondary Endocrine
Functions
Some organs have a secondary endocrine function. For
example, the walls of the atria of the heart produce the
hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), the
gastrointestinal tract produces the hormones gastrin,
secretin, and cholecystokinin, which aid in digestion,
and the kidneys produce erythropoietin (EPO), which
stimulates the formation of red blood cells. Even bone,
adipose tissue, and the skin have secondary endocrine
functions.
17.11 Development and Aging of the
Endocrine System
The endocrine system originates from all three germ
layers of the embryo, including the endoderm,
ectoderm, and mesoderm. In general, different
hormone classes arise from distinct germ layers. Aging
affects the endocrine glands, potentially affecting
hormone production and secretion, and can cause
disease. The production of hormones, such as human
growth hormone, cortisol, aldosterone, sex hormones,
and the thyroid hormones, decreases with age.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/hormonebind)
to watch an animation of the events that occur
when a hormone binds to a cell membrane
receptor. What is the secondary messenger made
by adenylyl cyclase during the activation of liver
cells by epinephrine?
2. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/roleofhypo) to
watch an animation showing the role of the
hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. Which
hormone is released by the pituitary to stimulate
the thyroid gland?
3. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/adrenalglands)
to view an animation describing the location and
function of the adrenal glands. Which hormone
produced by the adrenal glands is responsible for
mobilization of energy stores?
4. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/melatonin) to
view an animation describing the function of the
hormone melatonin. What should you avoid doing in
the middle of your sleep cycle that would lower
melatonin?
5. Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/pancreas1) to
view an animation describing the location and
function of the pancreas. What goes wrong in the
function of insulin in type 2 diabetes?
706
17 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
Review Questions
6. Endocrine glands ________.
a.
secrete hormones that travel through a duct to
the target organs
b.
release neurotransmitters into the synaptic
cleft
c.
secrete chemical messengers that travel in the
bloodstream
d.
include sebaceous glands and sweat glands
7. Chemical signaling that affects neighboring cells is
called ________.
a.
autocrine
b.
paracrine
c.
endocrine
d.
neuron
8. A newly developed pesticide has been observed to
bind to an intracellular hormone receptor. If
ingested, residue from this pesticide could disrupt
levels of ________.
a.
melatonin
b.
thyroid hormone
c.
growth hormone
d.
insulin
9. A small molecule binds to a G protein, preventing
its activation. What direct effect will this have on
signaling that involves cAMP?
a.
The hormone will not be able to bind to the
hormone receptor.
b.
Adenylyl cyclase will not be activated.
c.
Excessive quantities of cAMP will be produced.
d.
The phosphorylation cascade will be initiated.
10. A student is in a car accident, and although not
hurt, immediately experiences pupil dilation,
increased heart rate, and rapid breathing. What
type of endocrine system stimulus did the student
receive?
a.
humoral
b.
hormonal
c.
neural
d.
positive feedback
11. The hypothalamus is functionally and anatomically
connected to the posterior pituitary lobe by a
bridge of ________.
a.
blood vessels
b.
nerve axons
c.
cartilage
d.
bone
12. Which of the following is an anterior pituitary
hormone?
a.
ADH
b.
oxytocin
c.
TSH
d.
cortisol
13. How many hormones are produced by the
posterior pituitary?
a.
0
b.
1
c.
2
d.
6
14. Which of the following hormones contributes to
the regulation of the body’s fluid and electrolyte
balance?
a.
adrenocorticotropic hormone
b.
antidiuretic hormone
c.
luteinizing hormone
d.
all of the above
15. Which of the following statements about the
thyroid gland is true?
a.
It is located anterior to the trachea and
inferior to the larynx.
b.
The parathyroid glands are embedded within
it.
c.
It manufactures three hormones.
d.
all of the above
16. The secretion of thyroid hormones is controlled by
________.
a.
TSH from the hypothalamus
b.
TSH from the anterior pituitary
c.
thyroxine from the anterior pituitary
d.
thyroglobulin from the thyroid’s parafollicular
cells
17. The development of a goiter indicates that
________.
a.
the anterior pituitary is abnormally enlarged
b.
there is hypertrophy of the thyroid’s follicle
cells
c.
there is an excessive accumulation of colloid
in the thyroid follicles
d.
the anterior pituitary is secreting excessive
growth hormone
17 • Review Questions
707
18. Iodide ions cross from the bloodstream into
follicle cells via ________.
a.
simple diffusion
b.
facilitated diffusion
c.
active transport
d.
osmosis
19. When blood calcium levels are low, PTH
stimulates ________.
a.
urinary excretion of calcium by the kidneys
b.
a reduction in calcium absorption from the
intestines
c.
the activity of osteoblasts
d.
the activity of osteoclasts
20. Which of the following can result from
hyperparathyroidism?
a.
increased bone deposition
b.
fractures
c.
convulsions
d.
all of the above
21. The adrenal glands are attached superiorly to
which organ?
a.
thyroid
b.
liver
c.
kidneys
d.
hypothalamus
22. What secretory cell type is found in the adrenal
medulla?
a.
chromaffin cells
b.
neuroglial cells
c.
follicle cells
d.
oxyphil cells
23. Cushing’s disease is a disorder caused by
________.
a.
abnormally low levels of cortisol
b.
abnormally high levels of cortisol
c.
abnormally low levels of aldosterone
d.
abnormally high levels of aldosterone
24. Which of the following responses s not part of the
fight-or-flight response?
a.
pupil dilation
b.
increased oxygen supply to the lungs
c.
suppressed digestion
d.
reduced mental activity
25. What cells secrete melatonin?
a.
melanocytes
b.
pinealocytes
c.
suprachiasmatic nucleus cells
d.
retinal cells
26. The production of melatonin is inhibited by
________.
a.
declining levels of light
b.
exposure to bright light
c.
the secretion of serotonin
d.
the activity of pinealocytes
27. The gonads produce what class of hormones?
a.
amine hormones
b.
peptide hormones
c.
steroid hormones
d.
catecholamines
28. The production of FSH by the anterior pituitary is
reduced by which hormone?
a.
estrogens
b.
progesterone
c.
relaxin
d.
inhibin
29. The function of the placental hormone human
placental lactogen (hPL) is to ________.
a.
prepare the breasts for lactation
b.
nourish the placenta
c.
regulate the menstrual cycle
d.
all of the above
30. If an autoimmune disorder targets the alpha cells,
production of which hormone would be directly
affected?
a.
somatostatin
b.
pancreatic polypeptide
c.
insulin
d.
glucagon
31. Which of the following statements about insulin is
true?
a.
Insulin acts as a transport protein, carrying
glucose across the cell membrane.
b.
Insulin facilitates the movement of
intracellular glucose transporters to the cell
membrane.
c.
Insulin stimulates the breakdown of stored
glycogen into glucose.
d.
Insulin stimulates the kidneys to reabsorb
glucose into the bloodstream.
32. The walls of the atria produce which hormone?
a.
cholecystokinin
b.
atrial natriuretic peptide
c.
renin
d.
calcitriol
708
17 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
33. The end result of the RAAS is to ________.
a.
reduce blood volume
b.
increase blood glucose
c.
reduce blood pressure
d.
increase blood pressure
34. Athletes may take synthetic EPO to boost their
________.
a.
blood calcium levels
b.
secretion of growth hormone
c.
blood oxygen levels
d.
muscle mass
35. Hormones produced by the thymus play a role in
the ________.
a.
development of T cells
b.
preparation of the body for childbirth
c.
regulation of appetite
d.
release of hydrochloric acid in the stomach
36. The anterior pituitary gland develops from which
embryonic germ layer?
a.
oral ectoderm
b.
neural ectoderm
c.
mesoderm
d.
endoderm
37. In the elderly, decreased thyroid function causes
________.
a.
increased tolerance for cold
b.
decreased basal metabolic rate
c.
decreased body fat
d.
osteoporosis
Critical Thinking Questions
38. Describe several main differences in the
communication methods used by the endocrine
system and the nervous system.
39. Compare and contrast endocrine and exocrine
glands.
40. True or false: Neurotransmitters are a special
class of paracrines. Explain your answer.
41. Compare and contrast the signaling events
involved with the second messengers cAMP and
IP3.
42. Describe the mechanism of hormone response
resulting from the binding of a hormone with an
intracellular receptor.
43. Compare and contrast the anatomical relationship
of the anterior and posterior lobes of the pituitary
gland to the hypothalamus.
44. Name the target tissues for prolactin.
45. Explain why maternal iodine deficiency might lead
to neurological impairment in the fetus.
46. Define hyperthyroidism and explain why one of its
symptoms is weight loss.
47. Describe the role of negative feedback in the
function of the parathyroid gland.
48. Explain why someone with a parathyroid gland
tumor might develop kidney stones.
49. What are the three regions of the adrenal cortex
and what hormones do they produce?
50. If innervation to the adrenal medulla were
disrupted, what would be the physiological
outcome?
51. Compare and contrast the short-term and long-
term stress response.
52. Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a mood
disorder characterized by, among other
symptoms, increased appetite, sluggishness, and
increased sleepiness. It occurs most commonly
during the winter months, especially in regions
with long winter nights. Propose a role for
melatonin in SAD and a possible non-drug therapy.
53. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a disease that causes
deterioration of the retinas of the eyes. Describe
the impact RP would have on melatonin levels.
54. Compare and contrast the role of estrogens and
progesterone.
55. Describe the role of placental secretion of relaxin
in preparation for childbirth.
56. What would be the physiological consequence of a
disease that destroyed the beta cells of the
pancreas?
57. Why is foot care extremely important for people
with diabetes mellitus?
58. Summarize the role of GI tract hormones following
a meal.
59. Compare and contrast the thymus gland in infancy
and adulthood.
60. Distinguish between the effects of menopause
and andropause on fertility.
17 • Critical Thinking Questions
709
710
17 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 18
The Cardiovascular System: Blood
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the primary functions of blood, its fluid and cellular components, and its physical characteristics
•
Identify the most important proteins and other solutes present in blood plasma
•
Describe the formation of the formed element components of blood
•
Discuss the structure and function of red blood cells and hemoglobin
•
Classify and characterize white blood cells
•
Describe the structure of platelets and explain the process of hemostasis
•
Explain the significance of AB and Rh blood groups in blood transfusions
•
Discuss a variety of blood disorders
Single-celled organisms do not need blood. They obtain nutrients directly from and excrete
wastes directly into their environment. The human organism cannot do that. Our large, complex bodies need blood
to deliver nutrients to and remove wastes from our trillions of cells. The heart pumps blood throughout the body in a
network of blood vessels. Together, these three components—blood, heart, and vessels—makes up the
cardiovascular system. This chapter focuses on the medium of transport: blood.
18.1 An Overview of Blood
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the primary functions of blood in transportation, defense, and maintenance of homeostasis
•
Name the fluid component of blood and the three major types of formed elements, and identify their relative
proportions in a blood sample
•
Discuss the unique physical characteristics of blood
•
Identify the composition of blood plasma, including its most important solutes and plasma proteins
Recall that blood is a connective tissue. Like all connective tissues, it is made up of cellular elements and an
Figure 18.1
Blood Cells A single drop of blood contains millions of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. One of each type is
shown here, isolated from a scanning electron micrograph.
extracellular matrix. The cellular elements—referred to as the formed elements—include red blood cells (RBCs),
white blood cells (WBCs), and cell fragments called platelets. The extracellular matrix, called plasma, makes
blood unique among connective tissues because it is fluid. This fluid, which is mostly water, perpetually suspends
the formed elements and enables them to circulate throughout the body within the cardiovascular system.
Functions of Blood
The primary function of blood is to deliver oxygen and nutrients to and remove wastes from body cells, but that is
only the beginning of the story. The specific functions of blood also include defense, distribution of heat, and
maintenance of homeostasis.
Transportation
Nutrients from the foods you eat are absorbed in the digestive tract. Most of these travel in the bloodstream directly
to the liver, where they are processed and released back into the bloodstream for delivery to body cells. Oxygen
from the air you breathe diffuses into the blood, which moves from the lungs to the heart, which then pumps it out
to the rest of the body. Moreover, endocrine glands scattered throughout the body release their products, called
hormones, into the bloodstream, which carries them to distant target cells. Blood also picks up cellular wastes and
byproducts, and transports them to various organs for removal. For instance, blood moves carbon dioxide to the
lungs for exhalation from the body, and various waste products are transported to the kidneys and liver for excretion
from the body in the form of urine or bile.
Defense
Many types of WBCs protect the body from external threats, such as disease-causing bacteria that have entered the
bloodstream in a wound. Other WBCs seek out and destroy internal threats, such as cells with mutated DNA that
could multiply to become cancerous, or body cells infected with viruses.
When damage to the vessels results in bleeding, blood platelets and certain proteins dissolved in the plasma, the
fluid portion of the blood, interact to block the ruptured areas of the blood vessels involved. This protects the body
from further blood loss.
Maintenance of Homeostasis
Recall that body temperature is regulated via a classic negative-feedback loop. If you were exercising on a warm
day, your rising core body temperature would trigger several homeostatic mechanisms, including increased
transport of blood from your core to your body periphery, which is typically cooler. As blood passes through the
vessels of the skin, heat would be dissipated to the environment, and the blood returning to your body core would
be cooler. In contrast, on a cold day, blood is diverted away from the skin to maintain a warmer body core. In
extreme cases, this may result in frostbite.
Blood also helps to maintain the chemical balance of the body. Proteins and other compounds in blood act as
buffers, which thereby help to regulate the pH of body tissues. Blood also helps to regulate the water content of
body cells.
Composition of Blood
You have probably had blood drawn from a superficial vein in your arm, which was then sent to a lab for analysis.
Some of the most common blood tests—for instance, those measuring lipid or glucose levels in plasma—determine
which substances are present within blood and in what quantities. Other blood tests check for the composition of
the blood itself, including the quantities and types of formed elements.
One such test, called a hematocrit, measures the percentage of RBCs, clinically known as erythrocytes, in a blood
sample. It is performed by spinning the blood sample in a specialized centrifuge, a process that causes the heavier
elements suspended within the blood sample to separate from the lightweight, liquid plasma (Figure 18.2). Because
the heaviest elements in blood are the erythrocytes, these settle at the very bottom of the hematocrit tube. Located
above the erythrocytes is a pale, thin layer composed of the remaining formed elements of blood. These are the
WBCs, clinically known as leukocytes, and the platelets, cell fragments also called thrombocytes. This layer is
referred to as the buffy coat because of its color; it normally constitutes less than 1 percent of a blood sample.
Above the buffy coat is the blood plasma, normally a pale, straw-colored fluid, which constitutes the remainder of
the sample.
712
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
The volume of erythrocytes after centrifugation is also commonly referred to as packed cell volume (PCV). In
normal blood, about 45 percent of a sample is erythrocytes. The hematocrit of any one sample can vary significantly,
however, about 36–50 percent, according to gender and other factors. Normal hematocrit values for females range
from 37 to 47, with a mean value of 41; for males, hematocrit ranges from 42 to 52, with a mean of 47. The
percentage of other formed elements, the WBCs and platelets, is extremely small so it is not normally considered
with the hematocrit. So the mean plasma percentage is the percent of blood that is not erythrocytes: for females, it
is approximately 59 (or 100 minus 41), and for males, it is approximately 53 (or 100 minus 47).
FIGURE 18.2
Composition of Blood
The cellular elements of blood include a vast number of erythrocytes and comparatively fewer
leukocytes and platelets. Plasma is the fluid in which the formed elements are suspended. A sample of blood spun in a centrifuge reveals
that plasma is the lightest component. It floats at the top of the tube separated from the heaviest elements, the erythrocytes, by a buffy
coat of leukocytes and platelets. Hematocrit is the percentage of the total sample that is comprised of erythrocytes. Depressed and
elevated hematocrit levels are shown for comparison.
Characteristics of Blood
When you think about blood, the first characteristic that probably comes to mind is its color. Blood that has just
taken up oxygen in the lungs is bright red, and blood that has released oxygen in the tissues is a more dusky red.
This is because hemoglobin is a pigment that changes color, depending upon the degree of oxygen saturation.
Blood is viscous and somewhat sticky to the touch. It has a viscosity approximately five times greater than water.
Viscosity is a measure of a fluid’s thickness or resistance to flow, and is influenced by the presence of the plasma
proteins and formed elements within the blood. The viscosity of blood has a dramatic impact on blood pressure and
flow. Consider the difference in flow between water and honey. The more viscous honey would demonstrate a
greater resistance to flow than the less viscous water. The same principle applies to blood.
The normal temperature of blood is slightly higher than normal body temperature—about 38 °C (or 100.4 °F),
compared to 37 °C (or 98.6 °F) for an internal body temperature reading, although daily variations of 0.5 °C are
normal. Although the surface of blood vessels is relatively smooth, as blood flows through them, it experiences
some friction and resistance, especially as vessels age and lose their elasticity, thereby producing heat. This
accounts for its slightly higher temperature.
The pH of blood averages about 7.4; however, it can range from 7.35 to 7.45 in a healthy person. Blood is therefore
somewhat more basic (alkaline) on a chemical scale than pure water, which has a pH of 7.0. Blood contains
numerous buffers that actually help to regulate pH.
Blood constitutes approximately 8 percent of adult body weight. Adult males typically average about 5 to 6 liters of
blood. Females average 4–5 liters.
Blood Plasma
Like other fluids in the body, plasma is composed primarily of water: In fact, it is about 92 percent water. Dissolved
or suspended within this water is a mixture of substances, most of which are proteins. There are literally hundreds
of substances dissolved or suspended in the plasma, although many of them are found only in very small quantities.
18.1 • An Overview of Blood
713
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/normallevels) for a list of normal levels established for many of the substances
found in a sample of blood. Serum, one of the specimen types included, refers to a sample of plasma after clotting
factors have been removed. What types of measurements are given for levels of glucose in the blood?
Plasma Proteins
About 7 percent of the volume of plasma—nearly all that is not water—is made of proteins. These include several
plasma proteins (proteins that are unique to the plasma), plus a much smaller number of regulatory proteins,
including enzymes and some hormones. The major components of plasma are summarized in Figure 18.3.
The three major groups of plasma proteins are as follows:
•
Albumin is the most abundant of the plasma proteins. Manufactured by the liver, albumin molecules serve as
binding proteins—transport vehicles for fatty acids and steroid hormones. Recall that lipids are hydrophobic;
however, their binding to albumin enables their transport in the watery plasma. Albumin is also the most
significant contributor to the osmotic pressure of blood; that is, its presence holds water inside the blood
vessels and draws water from the tissues, across blood vessel walls, and into the bloodstream. This in turn
helps to maintain both blood volume and blood pressure. Albumin normally accounts for approximately 54
percent of the total plasma protein content, in clinical levels of 3.5–5.0 g/dL blood.
•
The second most common plasma proteins are the globulins. A heterogeneous group, there are three main
subgroups known as alpha, beta, and gamma globulins. The alpha and beta globulins transport iron, lipids, and
the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K to the cells; like albumin, they also contribute to osmotic pressure. The
gamma globulins are proteins involved in immunity and are better known as an antibodies or
immunoglobulins. Although other plasma proteins are produced by the liver, immunoglobulins are produced by
specialized leukocytes known as plasma cells. (Seek additional content for more information about
immunoglobulins.) Globulins make up approximately 38 percent of the total plasma protein volume, in clinical
levels of 1.0–1.5 g/dL blood.
•
Fibrinogen is the third of the three major groups of plasma proteins. Like albumin and the alpha and beta
globulins, fibrinogen is produced by the liver. It is essential for blood clotting, a process described later in this
chapter. Fibrinogen accounts for about 7 percent of the total plasma protein volume, in clinical levels of
0.2–0.45 g/dL blood.
Other Plasma Solutes
In addition to proteins, plasma contains a wide variety of other substances. These include various electrolytes, such
as sodium, potassium, and calcium ions; dissolved gases, such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen; various
organic nutrients, such as vitamins, lipids, glucose, and amino acids; and metabolic wastes. All of these nonprotein
solutes combined contribute approximately 1 percent to the total volume of plasma.
714
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.3
Major Blood Components
CAREER CONNECTION
Phlebotomy and Medical Lab Technology
Phlebotomists are professionals trained to draw blood (phleb- = “a blood vessel”; -tomy = “to cut”). When more
than a few drops of blood are required, phlebotomists perform a venipuncture, typically of a surface vein in the arm.
They perform a capillary stick on a finger, an earlobe, or the heel of an infant when only a small quantity of blood is
required. An arterial stick is collected from an artery and used to analyze blood gases. After collection, the blood
may be analyzed by medical laboratories or perhaps used for transfusions, donations, or research. While many allied
health professionals practice phlebotomy, the American Society of Phlebotomy Technicians issues certificates to
individuals passing a national examination, and some large labs and hospitals hire individuals expressly for their skill
18.1 • An Overview of Blood
715
in phlebotomy.
Medical or clinical laboratories employ a variety of individuals in technical positions:
•
Medical technologists (MT), also known as clinical laboratory technologists (CLT), typically hold a bachelor’s
degree and certification from an accredited training program. They perform a wide variety of tests on various
body fluids, including blood. The information they provide is essential to the primary care providers in
determining a diagnosis and in monitoring the course of a disease and response to treatment.
•
Medical laboratory technicians (MLT) typically have an associate’s degree but may perform duties similar to
those of an MT.
•
Medical laboratory assistants (MLA) spend the majority of their time processing samples and carrying out
routine assignments within the lab. Clinical training is required, but a degree may not be essential to obtaining a
position.
18.2 Production of the Formed Elements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Trace the generation of the formed elements of blood from bone marrow stem cells
•
Discuss the role of hemopoietic growth factors in promoting the production of the formed elements
The lifespan of the formed elements is very brief. Although one type of leukocyte called memory cells can survive for
years, most erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets normally live only a few hours to a few weeks. Thus, the body
must form new blood cells and platelets quickly and continuously. When you donate a unit of blood during a blood
drive (approximately 475 mL, or about 1 pint), your body typically replaces the donated plasma within 24 hours, but
it takes about 4 to 6 weeks to replace the blood cells. This restricts the frequency with which donors can contribute
their blood. The process by which this replacement occurs is called hemopoiesis, or hematopoiesis (from the Greek
root haima- = “blood”; -poiesis = “production”).
Sites of Hemopoiesis
Prior to birth, hemopoiesis occurs in a number of tissues, beginning with the yolk sac of the developing embryo, and
continuing in the fetal liver, spleen, lymphatic tissue, and eventually the red bone marrow. Following birth, most
hemopoiesis occurs in the red marrow, a connective tissue within the spaces of spongy (cancellous) bone tissue. In
children, hemopoiesis can occur in the medullary cavity of long bones; in adults, the process is largely restricted to
the cranial and pelvic bones, the vertebrae, the sternum, and the proximal epiphyses of the femur and humerus.
Throughout adulthood, the liver and spleen maintain their ability to generate the formed elements. This process is
referred to as extramedullary hemopoiesis (meaning hemopoiesis outside the medullary cavity of adult bones).
When a disease such as bone cancer destroys the bone marrow, causing hemopoiesis to fail, extramedullary
hemopoiesis may be initiated.
Differentiation of Formed Elements from Stem Cells
All formed elements arise from stem cells of the red bone marrow. Recall that stem cells undergo mitosis plus
cytokinesis (cellular division) to give rise to new daughter cells: One of these remains a stem cell and the other
differentiates into one of any number of diverse cell types. Stem cells may be viewed as occupying a hierarchal
system, with some loss of the ability to diversify at each step. The totipotent stem cell is the zygote, or fertilized
egg. The totipotent (toti- = “all”) stem cell gives rise to all cells of the human body. The next level is the pluripotent
stem cell, which gives rise to multiple types of cells of the body and some of the supporting fetal membranes.
Beneath this level, the mesenchymal cell is a stem cell that develops only into types of connective tissue, including
fibrous connective tissue, bone, cartilage, and blood, but not epithelium, muscle, and nervous tissue. One step lower
on the hierarchy of stem cells is the hematopoietic stem cell, or hemocytoblast. All of the formed elements of
blood originate from this specific type of cell.
Hemopoiesis begins when the hematopoietic stem cell is exposed to appropriate chemical stimuli collectively called
hemopoietic growth factors, which prompt it to divide and differentiate. One daughter cell remains a hematopoietic
stem cell, allowing hemopoiesis to continue. The other daughter cell becomes either of two types of more
716
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
specialized stem cells (Figure 18.4):
•
Lymphoid stem cells give rise to a class of leukocytes known as lymphocytes, which include the various T cells,
B cells, and natural killer (NK) cells, all of which function in immunity. However, hemopoiesis of lymphocytes
progresses somewhat differently from the process for the other formed elements. In brief, lymphoid stem cells
quickly migrate from the bone marrow to lymphatic tissues, including the lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus,
where their production and differentiation continues. B cells are so named since they mature in the bone
marrow, while T cells mature in the thymus.
•
Myeloid stem cells give rise to all the other formed elements, including the erythrocytes; megakaryocytes that
produce platelets; and a myeloblast lineage that gives rise to monocytes and three forms of granular
leukocytes: neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils.
FIGURE 18.4
Hematopoietic System of Bone Marrow
Hemopoiesis is the proliferation and differentiation of the formed elements of
blood.
Lymphoid and myeloid stem cells do not immediately divide and differentiate into mature formed elements. As you
can see in Figure 18.4, there are several intermediate stages of precursor cells (literally, forerunner cells), many of
which can be recognized by their names, which have the suffix -blast. For instance, megakaryoblasts are the
precursors of megakaryocytes, and proerythroblasts become reticulocytes, which eject their nucleus and most
other organelles before maturing into erythrocytes.
Hemopoietic Growth Factors
Development from stem cells to precursor cells to mature cells is again initiated by hemopoietic growth factors.
These include the following:
•
Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein hormone secreted by the interstitial fibroblast cells of the kidneys in
response to low oxygen levels. It prompts the production of erythrocytes. Some athletes use synthetic EPO as a
performance-enhancing drug (called blood doping) to increase RBC counts and subsequently increase oxygen
18.2 • Production of the Formed Elements
717
delivery to tissues throughout the body. EPO is a banned substance in most organized sports, but it is also used
medically in the treatment of certain anemia, specifically those triggered by certain types of cancer, and other
disorders in which increased erythrocyte counts and oxygen levels are desirable.
•
Thrombopoietin, another glycoprotein hormone, is produced by the liver and kidneys. It triggers the
development of megakaryocytes into platelets.
•
Cytokines are glycoproteins secreted by a wide variety of cells, including red bone marrow, leukocytes,
macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. They act locally as autocrine or paracrine factors, stimulating
the proliferation of progenitor cells and helping to stimulate both nonspecific and specific resistance to disease.
There are two major subtypes of cytokines known as colony-stimulating factors and interleukins.
◦
Colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) are glycoproteins that act locally, as autocrine or paracrine factors. Some
trigger the differentiation of myeloblasts into granular leukocytes, namely, neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils. These are referred to as granulocyte CSFs. A different CSF induces the production of monocytes,
called monocyte CSFs. Both granulocytes and monocytes are stimulated by GM-CSF; granulocytes,
monocytes, platelets, and erythrocytes are stimulated by multi-CSF. Synthetic forms of these hormones are
often administered to patients with various forms of cancer who are receiving chemotherapy to revive their
WBC counts.
◦
Interleukins are another class of cytokine signaling molecules important in hemopoiesis. They were initially
thought to be secreted uniquely by leukocytes and to communicate only with other leukocytes, and were
named accordingly, but are now known to be produced by a variety of cells including bone marrow and
endothelium. Researchers now suspect that interleukins may play other roles in body functioning, including
differentiation and maturation of cells, producing immunity and inflammation. To date, more than a dozen
interleukins have been identified, with others likely to follow. They are generally numbered IL-1, IL-2, IL-3,
etc.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/doping) to see doctors discuss the dangers of blood doping in sports. What
are the some potential side effects of blood doping?
Bone Marrow Sampling and Transplants
Sometimes, a healthcare provider will order a bone marrow biopsy, a diagnostic test of a sample of red bone
Everyday Connection
Blood Doping
In its original intent, the term blood doping was used to describe the practice of injecting by transfusion
supplemental RBCs into an individual, typically to enhance performance in a sport. Additional RBCs would
deliver more oxygen to the tissues, providing extra aerobic capacity, clinically referred to as VO2 max. The source
of the cells was either from the recipient (autologous) or from a donor with compatible blood (homologous). This
practice was aided by the well-developed techniques of harvesting, concentrating, and freezing of the RBCs that
could be later thawed and injected, yet still retain their functionality. These practices are considered illegal in
virtually all sports and run the risk of infection, significantly increasing the viscosity of the blood and the
potential for transmission of blood-borne pathogens if the blood was collected from another individual.
With the development of synthetic EPO in the 1980s, it became possible to provide additional RBCs by
artificially stimulating RBC production in the bone marrow. Originally developed to treat patients suffering from
anemia, renal failure, or cancer treatment, large quantities of EPO can be generated by recombinant DNA
technology. Synthetic EPO is injected under the skin and can increase hematocrit for many weeks. It may also
induce polycythemia and raise hematocrit to 70 or greater. This increased viscosity raises the resistance of the
blood and forces the heart to pump more powerfully; in extreme cases, it has resulted in death. Other drugs
such as cobalt II chloride have been shown to increase natural EPO gene expression. Blood doping has become
problematic in many sports, especially cycling. Lance Armstrong, winner of seven Tour de France and many
other cycling titles, was stripped of his victories and admitted to blood doping in 2013.
718
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
marrow, or a bone marrow transplant, a treatment in which a donor’s healthy bone marrow—and its stem
cells—replaces the faulty bone marrow of a patient. These tests and procedures are often used to assist in the
diagnosis and treatment of various severe forms of anemia, such as thalassemia major and sickle cell anemia, as
well as some types of cancer, specifically leukemia.
In the past, when a bone marrow sample or transplant was necessary, the procedure would have required inserting
a large-bore needle into the region near the iliac crest of the pelvic bones (os coxae). This location was preferred,
since its location close to the body surface makes it more accessible, and it is relatively isolated from most vital
organs. Unfortunately, the procedure is quite painful.
Now, direct sampling of bone marrow can often be avoided. In many cases, stem cells can be isolated in just a few
hours from a sample of a patient’s blood. The isolated stem cells are then grown in culture using the appropriate
hemopoietic growth factors, and analyzed or sometimes frozen for later use.
For an individual requiring a transplant, a matching donor is essential to prevent the immune system from
destroying the donor cells—a phenomenon known as tissue rejection. To treat patients with bone marrow
transplants, it is first necessary to destroy the patient’s own diseased marrow through radiation and/or
chemotherapy. Donor bone marrow stem cells are then intravenously infused. From the bloodstream, they establish
themselves in the recipient’s bone marrow.
18.3 Erythrocytes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the anatomy of erythrocytes
•
Discuss the various steps in the lifecycle of an erythrocyte
•
Explain the composition and function of hemoglobin
The erythrocyte, commonly known as a red blood cell (or RBC), is by far the most common formed element: A
single drop of blood contains millions of erythrocytes and just thousands of leukocytes. Specifically, males have
about 5.4 million erythrocytes per microliter (µL) of blood, and females have approximately 4.8 million per µL. In
fact, erythrocytes are estimated to make up about 25 percent of the total cells in the body. As you can imagine, they
are quite small cells, with a mean diameter of only about 7–8 micrometers (µm) (Figure 18.5). The primary functions
of erythrocytes are to pick up inhaled oxygen from the lungs and transport it to the body’s tissues, and to pick up
some (about 24 percent) carbon dioxide waste at the tissues and transport it to the lungs for exhalation.
Erythrocytes remain within the vascular network. Although leukocytes typically leave the blood vessels to perform
their defensive functions, movement of erythrocytes from the blood vessels is abnormal.
18.3 • Erythrocytes
719
720
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.5
Summary of Formed Elements in Blood
Shape and Structure of Erythrocytes
As an erythrocyte matures in the red bone marrow, it extrudes its nucleus and most of its other organelles. During
the first day or two that it is in the circulation, an immature erythrocyte, known as a reticulocyte, will still typically
contain remnants of organelles. Reticulocytes should comprise approximately 1–2 percent of the erythrocyte count
and provide a rough estimate of the rate of RBC production, with abnormally low or high rates indicating deviations
in the production of these cells. These remnants, primarily of networks (reticulum) of ribosomes, are quickly shed,
however, and mature, circulating erythrocytes have few internal cellular structural components. Lacking
mitochondria, for example, they rely on anaerobic respiration. This means that they do not utilize any of the oxygen
they are transporting, so they can deliver it all to the tissues. They also lack endoplasmic reticula and do not
synthesize proteins. Erythrocytes do, however, contain some structural proteins that help the blood cells maintain
their unique structure and enable them to change their shape to squeeze through capillaries. This includes the
protein spectrin, a cytoskeletal protein element.
Erythrocytes are biconcave disks; that is, they are plump at their periphery and very thin in the center (Figure 18.6).
Since they lack most organelles, there is more interior space for the presence of the hemoglobin molecules that, as
you will see shortly, transport gases. The biconcave shape also provides a greater surface area across which gas
exchange can occur, relative to its volume; a sphere of a similar diameter would have a lower surface area-to-
volume ratio. In the capillaries, the oxygen carried by the erythrocytes can diffuse into the plasma and then through
the capillary walls to reach the cells, whereas some of the carbon dioxide produced by the cells as a waste product
diffuses into the capillaries to be picked up by the erythrocytes. Capillary beds are extremely narrow, slowing the
passage of the erythrocytes and providing an extended opportunity for gas exchange to occur. However, the space
within capillaries can be so minute that, despite their own small size, erythrocytes may have to fold in on
themselves if they are to make their way through. Fortunately, their structural proteins like spectrin are flexible,
allowing them to bend over themselves to a surprising degree, then spring back again when they enter a wider
vessel. In wider vessels, erythrocytes may stack up much like a roll of coins, forming a rouleaux, from the French
word for “roll.”
FIGURE 18.6
Shape of Red Blood Cells
Erythrocytes are biconcave discs with very shallow centers. This shape optimizes the ratio of
surface area to volume, facilitating gas exchange. It also enables them to fold up as they move through narrow blood vessels.
Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin is a large molecule made up of proteins and iron. It consists of four folded chains of a protein called
18.3 • Erythrocytes
721
globin, designated alpha 1 and 2, and beta 1 and 2 (Figure 18.7a). Each of these globin molecules is bound to a red
pigment molecule called heme, which contains an ion of iron (Fe2+) (Figure 18.7b).
FIGURE 18.7
Hemoglobin
(a) A molecule of hemoglobin contains four globin proteins, each of which is bound to one molecule of the
iron-containing pigment heme. (b) A single erythrocyte can contain 300 million hemoglobin molecules, and thus more than 1 billion oxygen
molecules.
Each iron ion in the heme can bind to one oxygen molecule; therefore, each hemoglobin molecule can transport four
oxygen molecules. An individual erythrocyte may contain about 300 million hemoglobin molecules, and therefore
can bind to and transport up to 1.2 billion oxygen molecules (see Figure 18.7b).
In the lungs, hemoglobin picks up oxygen, which binds to the iron ions, forming oxyhemoglobin. The bright red,
oxygenated hemoglobin travels to the body tissues, where it releases some of the oxygen molecules, becoming
darker red deoxyhemoglobin, sometimes referred to as reduced hemoglobin. Oxygen release depends on the need
for oxygen in the surrounding tissues, so hemoglobin rarely if ever leaves all of its oxygen behind. In the capillaries,
carbon dioxide enters the bloodstream. About 76 percent dissolves in the plasma, some of it remaining as dissolved
CO2, and the remainder forming bicarbonate ion. About 23–24 percent of it binds to the amino acids in hemoglobin,
forming a molecule known as carbaminohemoglobin. From the capillaries, the hemoglobin carries carbon dioxide
back to the lungs, where it releases it for exchange of oxygen.
Changes in the levels of RBCs can have significant effects on the body’s ability to effectively deliver oxygen to the
tissues. Ineffective hematopoiesis results in insufficient numbers of RBCs and results in one of several forms of
anemia. An overproduction of RBCs produces a condition called polycythemia. The primary drawback with
polycythemia is not a failure to directly deliver enough oxygen to the tissues, but rather the increased viscosity of
the blood, which makes it more difficult for the heart to circulate the blood.
In patients with insufficient hemoglobin, the tissues may not receive sufficient oxygen, resulting in another form of
anemia. In determining oxygenation of tissues, the value of greatest interest in healthcare is the percent saturation;
that is, the percentage of hemoglobin sites occupied by oxygen in a patient’s blood. Clinically this value is commonly
referred to simply as “percent sat.”
Percent saturation is normally monitored using a device known as a pulse oximeter, which is applied to a thin part of
the body, typically the tip of the patient’s finger. The device works by sending two different wavelengths of light (one
red, the other infrared) through the finger and measuring the light with a photodetector as it exits. Hemoglobin
absorbs light differentially depending upon its saturation with oxygen. The machine calibrates the amount of light
received by the photodetector against the amount absorbed by the partially oxygenated hemoglobin and presents
the data as percent saturation. Normal pulse oximeter readings range from 95–100 percent. Lower percentages
reflect hypoxemia, or low blood oxygen. The term hypoxia is more generic and simply refers to low oxygen levels.
Oxygen levels are also directly monitored from free oxygen in the plasma typically following an arterial stick. When
this method is applied, the amount of oxygen present is expressed in terms of partial pressure of oxygen or simply
PO2 or PO2 and is typically recorded in units of millimeters of mercury, mm Hg.
722
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
The kidneys filter about 180 liters (~380 pints) of blood in an average adult each day, or about 20 percent of the
total resting volume, and thus serve as ideal sites for receptors that determine oxygen saturation. In response to
hypoxemia, less oxygen will exit the vessels supplying the kidney, resulting in hypoxia (low oxygen concentration) in
the tissue fluid of the kidney where oxygen concentration is actually monitored. Interstitial fibroblasts within the
kidney secrete EPO, thereby increasing erythrocyte production and restoring oxygen levels. In a classic negative-
feedback loop, as oxygen saturation rises, EPO secretion falls, and vice versa, thereby maintaining homeostasis.
Populations dwelling at high elevations, with inherently lower levels of oxygen in the atmosphere, naturally maintain
a hematocrit higher than people living at sea level. Consequently, people traveling to high elevations may experience
symptoms of hypoxemia, such as fatigue, headache, and shortness of breath, for a few days after their arrival. In
response to the hypoxemia, the kidneys secrete EPO to step up the production of erythrocytes until homeostasis is
achieved once again. To avoid the symptoms of hypoxemia, or altitude sickness, mountain climbers typically rest for
several days to a week or more at a series of camps situated at increasing elevations to allow EPO levels and,
consequently, erythrocyte counts to rise. When climbing the tallest peaks, such as Mt. Everest and K2 in the
Himalayas, many mountain climbers rely upon bottled oxygen as they near the summit.
Lifecycle of Erythrocytes
Production of erythrocytes in the marrow occurs at the staggering rate of more than 2 million cells per second. For
this production to occur, a number of raw materials must be present in adequate amounts. These include the same
nutrients that are essential to the production and maintenance of any cell, such as glucose, lipids, and amino acids.
However, erythrocyte production also requires several trace elements:
•
Iron. We have said that each heme group in a hemoglobin molecule contains an ion of the trace mineral iron. On
average, less than 20 percent of the iron we consume is absorbed. Heme iron, from animal foods such as meat,
poultry, and fish, is absorbed more efficiently than non-heme iron from plant foods. Upon absorption, iron
becomes part of the body’s total iron pool. The bone marrow, liver, and spleen can store iron in the protein
compounds ferritin and hemosiderin. Ferroportin transports the iron across the intestinal cell plasma
membranes and from its storage sites into tissue fluid where it enters the blood. When EPO stimulates the
production of erythrocytes, iron is released from storage, bound to transferrin, and carried to the red marrow
where it attaches to erythrocyte precursors.
•
Copper. A trace mineral, copper is a component of two plasma proteins, hephaestin and ceruloplasmin. Without
these, hemoglobin could not be adequately produced. Located in intestinal villi, hephaestin enables iron to be
absorbed by intestinal cells. Ceruloplasmin transports copper. Both enable the oxidation of iron from Fe2+ to
Fe3+, a form in which it can be bound to its transport protein, transferrin, for transport to body cells. In a state
of copper deficiency, the transport of iron for heme synthesis decreases, and iron can accumulate in tissues,
where it can eventually lead to organ damage.
•
Zinc. The trace mineral zinc functions as a co-enzyme that facilitates the synthesis of the heme portion of
hemoglobin.
•
B vitamins. The B vitamins folate and vitamin B12 function as co-enzymes that facilitate DNA synthesis. Thus,
both are critical for the synthesis of new cells, including erythrocytes.
Erythrocytes live up to 120 days in the circulation, after which the worn-out cells are removed by a type of myeloid
phagocytic cell called a macrophage, located primarily within the bone marrow, liver, and spleen. The components
of the degraded erythrocytes’ hemoglobin are further processed as follows:
•
Globin, the protein portion of hemoglobin, is broken down into amino acids, which can be sent back to the bone
marrow to be used in the production of new erythrocytes. Hemoglobin that is not phagocytized is broken down
in the circulation, releasing alpha and beta chains that are removed from circulation by the kidneys.
•
The iron contained in the heme portion of hemoglobin may be stored in the liver or spleen, primarily in the form
of ferritin or hemosiderin, or carried through the bloodstream by transferrin to the red bone marrow for
recycling into new erythrocytes.
•
The non-iron portion of heme is degraded into the waste product biliverdin, a green pigment, and then into
another waste product, bilirubin, a yellow pigment. Bilirubin binds to albumin and travels in the blood to the
liver, which uses it in the manufacture of bile, a compound released into the intestines to help emulsify dietary
fats. In the large intestine, bacteria breaks the bilirubin apart from the bile and converts it to urobilinogen and
then into stercobilin. It is then eliminated from the body in the feces. Broad-spectrum antibiotics typically
18.3 • Erythrocytes
723
eliminate these bacteria as well and may alter the color of feces. The kidneys also remove any circulating
bilirubin and other related metabolic byproducts such as urobilins and secrete them into the urine.
The breakdown pigments formed from the destruction of hemoglobin can be seen in a variety of situations. At the
site of an injury, biliverdin from damaged RBCs produces some of the dramatic colors associated with a bruise. With
a failing liver, bilirubin cannot be removed effectively from circulation and causes the body to assume a yellowish
tinge associated with jaundice. Stercobilins within the feces produce the typical brown color associated with this
waste. And the yellow of urine is associated with the urobilins.
The erythrocyte lifecycle is summarized in Figure 18.8.
724
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.8
Erythrocyte Lifecycle
Erythrocytes are produced in the bone marrow and sent into the circulation. At the end of their
lifecycle, they are destroyed by macrophages, and their components are recycled.
Disorders of Erythrocytes
The size, shape, and number of erythrocytes, and the number of hemoglobin molecules can have a major impact on
a person’s health. When the number of RBCs or hemoglobin is deficient, the general condition is called anemia.
There are more than 400 types of anemia and more than 3.5 million Americans suffer from this condition. Anemia
18.3 • Erythrocytes
725
can be broken down into three major groups: those caused by blood loss, those caused by faulty or decreased RBC
production, and those caused by excessive destruction of RBCs. Clinicians often use two groupings in diagnosis: The
kinetic approach focuses on evaluating the production, destruction, and removal of RBCs, whereas the
morphological approach examines the RBCs themselves, paying particular emphasis to their size. A common test is
the mean corpuscle volume (MCV), which measures size. Normal-sized cells are referred to as normocytic, smaller-
than-normal cells are referred to as microcytic, and larger-than-normal cells are referred to as macrocytic.
Reticulocyte counts are also important and may reveal inadequate production of RBCs. The effects of the various
anemias are widespread, because reduced numbers of RBCs or hemoglobin will result in lower levels of oxygen
being delivered to body tissues. Since oxygen is required for tissue functioning, anemia produces fatigue, lethargy,
and an increased risk for infection. An oxygen deficit in the brain impairs the ability to think clearly, and may prompt
headaches and irritability. Lack of oxygen leaves the patient short of breath, even as the heart and lungs work harder
in response to the deficit.
Blood loss anemias are fairly straightforward. In addition to bleeding from wounds or other lesions, these forms of
anemia may be due to ulcers, hemorrhoids, inflammation of the stomach (gastritis), and some cancers of the
gastrointestinal tract. The excessive use of aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen
can trigger ulceration and gastritis. Excessive menstruation and loss of blood during childbirth are also potential
causes.
Anemias caused by faulty or decreased RBC production include sickle cell anemia, iron deficiency anemia, vitamin
deficiency anemia, and diseases of the bone marrow and stem cells.
•
A characteristic change in the shape of erythrocytes is seen in sickle cell disease (also referred to as sickle cell
anemia). A genetic disorder, it is caused by production of an abnormal type of hemoglobin, called hemoglobin S,
which delivers less oxygen to tissues and causes erythrocytes to assume a sickle (or crescent) shape, especially
at low oxygen concentrations (Figure 18.9). These abnormally shaped cells can then become lodged in narrow
capillaries because they are unable to fold in on themselves to squeeze through, blocking blood flow to tissues
and causing a variety of serious problems from painful joints to delayed growth and even blindness and
cerebrovascular accidents (strokes). Sickle cell anemia is a genetic condition particularly found in individuals of
African descent.
FIGURE 18.9
Sickle Cells
Sickle cell anemia is caused by a mutation in one of the hemoglobin genes. Erythrocytes produce an
abnormal type of hemoglobin, which causes the cell to take on a sickle or crescent shape. (credit: Janice Haney Carr)
•
Iron deficiency anemia is the most common type and results when the amount of available iron is insufficient to
allow production of sufficient heme. This condition can occur in individuals with a deficiency of iron in the diet
726
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
and is especially common in teens and children as well as in vegans and vegetarians. Additionally, iron
deficiency anemia may be caused by either an inability to absorb and transport iron or slow, chronic bleeding.
•
Vitamin-deficient anemias generally involve insufficient vitamin B12 and folate.
◦
Megaloblastic anemia involves a deficiency of vitamin B12 and/or folate, and often involves diets deficient in
these essential nutrients. Lack of meat or a viable alternate source, and overcooking or eating insufficient
amounts of vegetables may lead to a lack of folate.
◦
Pernicious anemia is caused by poor absorption of vitamin B12 and is often seen in patients with Crohn’s
disease (a severe intestinal disorder often treated by surgery), surgical removal of the intestines or stomach
(common in some weight loss surgeries), intestinal parasites, and AIDS.
◦
Pregnancies, some medications, excessive alcohol consumption, and some diseases such as celiac disease
are also associated with vitamin deficiencies. It is essential to provide sufficient folic acid during the early
stages of pregnancy to reduce the risk of neurological defects, including spina bifida, a failure of the neural
tube to close.
•
Assorted disease processes can also interfere with the production and formation of RBCs and hemoglobin. If
myeloid stem cells are defective or replaced by cancer cells, there will be insufficient quantities of RBCs
produced.
◦
Aplastic anemia is the condition in which there are deficient numbers of RBC stem cells. Aplastic anemia is
often inherited, or it may be triggered by radiation, medication, chemotherapy, or infection.
◦
Thalassemia is an inherited condition typically occurring in individuals from the Middle East, the
Mediterranean, African, and Southeast Asia, in which maturation of the RBCs does not proceed normally. The
most severe form is called Cooley’s anemia.
◦
Lead exposure from industrial sources or even dust from paint chips of iron-containing paints or pottery that
has not been properly glazed may also lead to destruction of the red marrow.
•
Various disease processes also can lead to anemias. These include chronic kidney diseases often associated
with a decreased production of EPO, hypothyroidism, some forms of cancer, lupus, and rheumatoid arthritis.
In contrast to anemia, an elevated RBC count is called polycythemia and is detected in a patient’s elevated
hematocrit. It can occur transiently in a person who is dehydrated; when water intake is inadequate or water losses
are excessive, the plasma volume falls. As a result, the hematocrit rises. For reasons mentioned earlier, a mild form
of polycythemia is chronic but normal in people living at high altitudes. Some elite athletes train at high elevations
specifically to induce this phenomenon. Finally, a type of bone marrow disease called polycythemia vera (from the
Greek vera = “true”) causes an excessive production of immature erythrocytes. Polycythemia vera can dangerously
elevate the viscosity of blood, raising blood pressure and making it more difficult for the heart to pump blood
throughout the body. It is a relatively rare disease that occurs more often in males than in females, and is more
likely to be present in elderly patients those over 60 years of age.
18.4 Leukocytes and Platelets
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the general characteristics of leukocytes
•
Classify leukocytes according to their lineage, their main structural features, and their primary functions
•
Discuss the most common malignancies involving leukocytes
•
Identify the lineage, basic structure, and function of platelets
The leukocyte, commonly known as a white blood cell (or WBC), is a major component of the body’s defenses
against disease. Leukocytes protect the body against invading microorganisms and body cells with mutated DNA,
and they clean up debris. Platelets are essential for the repair of blood vessels when damage to them has occurred;
they also provide growth factors for healing and repair. See Figure 18.5 for a summary of leukocytes and platelets.
Characteristics of Leukocytes
Although leukocytes and erythrocytes both originate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow, they are
very different from each other in many significant ways. For instance, leukocytes are far less numerous than
erythrocytes: Typically there are only 5000 to 10,000 per µL. They are also larger than erythrocytes and are the only
18.4 • Leukocytes and Platelets
727
formed elements that are complete cells, possessing a nucleus and organelles. And although there is just one type
of erythrocyte, there are many types of leukocytes. Most of these types have a much shorter lifespan than that of
erythrocytes, some as short as a few hours or even a few minutes in the case of acute infection.
One of the most distinctive characteristics of leukocytes is their movement. Whereas erythrocytes spend their days
circulating within the blood vessels, leukocytes routinely leave the bloodstream to perform their defensive functions
in the body’s tissues. For leukocytes, the vascular network is simply a highway they travel and soon exit to reach
their true destination. When they arrive, they are often given distinct names, such as macrophage or microglia,
depending on their function. As shown in Figure 18.10, they leave the capillaries—the smallest blood vessels—or
other small vessels through a process known as emigration (from the Latin for “removal”) or diapedesis (dia- =
“through”; -pedan = “to leap”) in which they squeeze through adjacent cells in a blood vessel wall.
Once they have exited the capillaries, some leukocytes will take up fixed positions in lymphatic tissue, bone marrow,
the spleen, the thymus, or other organs. Others will move about through the tissue spaces very much like amoebas,
continuously extending their plasma membranes, sometimes wandering freely, and sometimes moving toward the
direction in which they are drawn by chemical signals. This attracting of leukocytes occurs because of positive
chemotaxis (literally “movement in response to chemicals”), a phenomenon in which injured or infected cells and
nearby leukocytes emit the equivalent of a chemical “911” call, attracting more leukocytes to the site. In clinical
medicine, the differential counts of the types and percentages of leukocytes present are often key indicators in
making a diagnosis and selecting a treatment.
728
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.10
Emigration
Leukocytes exit the blood vessel and then move through the connective tissue of the dermis toward the site
of a wound. Some leukocytes, such as the eosinophil and neutrophil, are characterized as granular leukocytes. They release chemicals from
their granules that destroy pathogens; they are also capable of phagocytosis. The monocyte, an agranular leukocyte, differentiates into a
macrophage that then phagocytizes the pathogens.
Classification of Leukocytes
When scientists first began to observe stained blood slides, it quickly became evident that leukocytes could be
divided into two groups, according to whether their cytoplasm contained highly visible granules:
•
Granular leukocytes contain abundant granules within the cytoplasm. They include neutrophils, eosinophils,
18.4 • Leukocytes and Platelets
729
and basophils (you can view their lineage from myeloid stem cells in Figure 18.4).
•
While granules are not totally lacking in agranular leukocytes, they are far fewer and less obvious. Agranular
leukocytes include monocytes, which mature into macrophages that are phagocytic, and lymphocytes, which
arise from the lymphoid stem cell line.
Granular Leukocytes
We will consider the granular leukocytes in order from most common to least common. All of these are produced in
the red bone marrow and have a short lifespan of hours to days. They typically have a lobed nucleus and are
classified according to which type of stain best highlights their granules (Figure 18.11).
FIGURE 18.11
Granular Leukocytes
A neutrophil has small granules that stain light lilac and a nucleus with two to five lobes. An
eosinophil’s granules are slightly larger and stain reddish-orange, and its nucleus has two to three lobes. A basophil has large granules that
stain dark blue to purple and a two-lobed nucleus.
The most common of all the leukocytes, neutrophils will normally comprise 50–70 percent of total leukocyte count.
They are 10–12 µm in diameter, significantly larger than erythrocytes. They are called neutrophils because their
granules show up most clearly with stains that are chemically neutral (neither acidic nor basic). The granules are
numerous but quite fine and normally appear light lilac. The nucleus has a distinct lobed appearance and may have
two to five lobes, the number increasing with the age of the cell. Older neutrophils have increasing numbers of lobes
and are often referred to as polymorphonuclear (a nucleus with many forms), or simply “polys.” Younger and
immature neutrophils begin to develop lobes and are known as “bands.”
Neutrophils are rapid responders to the site of infection and are efficient phagocytes with a preference for bacteria.
Their granules include lysozyme, an enzyme capable of lysing, or breaking down, bacterial cell walls; oxidants such
as hydrogen peroxide; and defensins, proteins that bind to and puncture bacterial and fungal plasma membranes,
so that the cell contents leak out. Abnormally high counts of neutrophils indicate infection and/or inflammation,
particularly triggered by bacteria, but are also found in burn patients and others experiencing unusual stress. A burn
injury increases the proliferation of neutrophils in order to fight off infection that can result from the destruction of
the barrier of the skin. Low counts may be caused by drug toxicity and other disorders, and may increase an
individual’s susceptibility to infection.
Eosinophils typically represent 2–4 percent of total leukocyte count. They are also 10–12 µm in diameter. The
granules of eosinophils stain best with an acidic stain known as eosin. The nucleus of the eosinophil will typically
have two to three lobes and, if stained properly, the granules will have a distinct red to orange color.
The granules of eosinophils include antihistamine molecules, which counteract the activities of histamines,
inflammatory chemicals produced by basophils and mast cells. Some eosinophil granules contain molecules toxic to
parasitic worms, which can enter the body through the integument, or when an individual consumes raw or
undercooked fish or meat. Eosinophils are also capable of phagocytosis and are particularly effective when
antibodies bind to the target and form an antigen-antibody complex. High counts of eosinophils are typical of
patients experiencing allergies, parasitic worm infestations, and some autoimmune diseases. Low counts may be
due to drug toxicity and stress.
Basophils are the least common leukocytes, typically comprising less than one percent of the total leukocyte count.
They are slightly smaller than neutrophils and eosinophils at 8–10 µm in diameter. The granules of basophils stain
best with basic (alkaline) stains. Basophils contain large granules that pick up a dark blue stain and are so common
they may make it difficult to see the two-lobed nucleus.
In general, basophils intensify the inflammatory response. They share this trait with mast cells. In the past, mast
cells were considered to be basophils that left the circulation. However, this appears not to be the case, as the two
730
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
cell types develop from different lineages.
The granules of basophils release histamines, which contribute to inflammation, and heparin, which opposes blood
clotting. High counts of basophils are associated with allergies, parasitic infections, and hypothyroidism. Low counts
are associated with pregnancy, stress, and hyperthyroidism.
Agranular Leukocytes
Agranular leukocytes contain smaller, less-visible granules in their cytoplasm than do granular leukocytes. The
nucleus is simple in shape, sometimes with an indentation but without distinct lobes. There are two major types of
agranulocytes: lymphocytes and monocytes (see Figure 18.4).
Lymphocytes are the only formed element of blood that arises from lymphoid stem cells. Although they form
initially in the bone marrow, much of their subsequent development and reproduction occurs in the lymphatic
tissues. Lymphocytes are the second most common type of leukocyte, accounting for about 20–30 percent of all
leukocytes, and are essential for the immune response. The size range of lymphocytes is quite extensive, with some
authorities recognizing two size classes and others three. Typically, the large cells are 10–14 µm and have a smaller
nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio and more granules. The smaller cells are typically 6–9 µm with a larger volume of
nucleus to cytoplasm, creating a “halo” effect. A few cells may fall outside these ranges, at 14–17 µm. This finding
has led to the three size range classification.
The three major groups of lymphocytes include natural killer cells, B cells, and T cells. Natural killer (NK) cells are
capable of recognizing cells that do not express “self” proteins on their plasma membrane or that contain foreign or
abnormal markers. These “nonself” cells include cancer cells, cells infected with a virus, and other cells with
atypical surface proteins. Thus, they provide generalized, nonspecific immunity. The larger lymphocytes are typically
NK cells.
B cells and T cells, also called B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes, play prominent roles in defending the body
against specific pathogens (disease-causing microorganisms) and are involved in specific immunity. One form of B
cells (plasma cells) produces the antibodies or immunoglobulins that bind to specific foreign or abnormal
components of plasma membranes. This is also referred to as humoral (body fluid) immunity. T cells provide
cellular-level immunity by physically attacking foreign or diseased cells. A memory cell is a variety of both B and T
cells that forms after exposure to a pathogen and mounts rapid responses upon subsequent exposures. Unlike other
leukocytes, memory cells live for many years. B cells undergo a maturation process in the bone marrow, whereas T
cells undergo maturation in the thymus. This site of the maturation process gives rise to the name B and T cells. The
functions of lymphocytes are complex and will be covered in detail in the chapter covering the lymphatic system and
immunity. Smaller lymphocytes are either B or T cells, although they cannot be differentiated in a normal blood
smear.
Abnormally high lymphocyte counts are characteristic of viral infections as well as some types of cancer. Abnormally
low lymphocyte counts are characteristic of prolonged (chronic) illness or immunosuppression, including that
caused by HIV infection and drug therapies that often involve steroids.
Monocytes originate from myeloid stem cells. They normally represent 2–8 percent of the total leukocyte count.
They are typically easily recognized by their large size of 12–20 µm and indented or horseshoe-shaped nuclei.
Macrophages are monocytes that have left the circulation and phagocytize debris, foreign pathogens, worn-out
erythrocytes, and many other dead, worn out, or damaged cells. Macrophages also release antimicrobial defensins
and chemotactic chemicals that attract other leukocytes to the site of an infection. Some macrophages occupy fixed
locations, whereas others wander through the tissue fluid.
Abnormally high counts of monocytes are associated with viral or fungal infections, tuberculosis, and some forms of
leukemia and other chronic diseases. Abnormally low counts are typically caused by suppression of the bone
marrow.
Lifecycle of Leukocytes
Most leukocytes have a relatively short lifespan, typically measured in hours or days. Production of all leukocytes
begins in the bone marrow under the influence of CSFs and interleukins. Secondary production and maturation of
lymphocytes occurs in specific regions of lymphatic tissue known as germinal centers. Lymphocytes are fully
18.4 • Leukocytes and Platelets
731
capable of mitosis and may produce clones of cells with identical properties. This capacity enables an individual to
maintain immunity throughout life to many threats that have been encountered in the past.
Disorders of Leukocytes
Leukopenia is a condition in which too few leukocytes are produced. If this condition is pronounced, the individual
may be unable to ward off disease. Excessive leukocyte proliferation is known as leukocytosis. Although leukocyte
counts are high, the cells themselves are often nonfunctional, leaving the individual at increased risk for disease.
Leukemia is a cancer involving an abundance of leukocytes. It may involve only one specific type of leukocyte from
either the myeloid line (myelocytic leukemia) or the lymphoid line (lymphocytic leukemia). In chronic leukemia,
mature leukocytes accumulate and fail to die. In acute leukemia, there is an overproduction of young, immature
leukocytes. In both conditions the cells do not function properly.
Lymphoma is a form of cancer in which masses of malignant T and/or B lymphocytes collect in lymph nodes, the
spleen, the liver, and other tissues. As in leukemia, the malignant leukocytes do not function properly, and the
patient is vulnerable to infection. Some forms of lymphoma tend to progress slowly and respond well to treatment.
Others tend to progress quickly and require aggressive treatment, without which they are rapidly fatal.
Platelets
You may occasionally see platelets referred to as thrombocytes, but because this name suggests they are a type of
cell, it is not accurate. A platelet is not a cell but rather a fragment of the cytoplasm of a cell called a megakaryocyte
that is surrounded by a plasma membrane. Megakaryocytes are descended from myeloid stem cells (see Figure
18.4) and are large, typically 50–100 µm in diameter, and contain an enlarged, lobed nucleus. As noted earlier,
thrombopoietin, a glycoprotein secreted by the kidneys and liver, stimulates the proliferation of megakaryoblasts,
which mature into megakaryocytes. These remain within bone marrow tissue (Figure 18.12) and ultimately form
platelet-precursor extensions that extend through the walls of bone marrow capillaries to release into the
circulation thousands of cytoplasmic fragments, each enclosed by a bit of plasma membrane. These enclosed
fragments are platelets. Each megakarocyte releases 2000–3000 platelets during its lifespan. Following platelet
release, megakaryocyte remnants, which are little more than a cell nucleus, are consumed by macrophages.
Platelets are relatively small, 2–4 µm in diameter, but numerous, with typically 150,000–160,000 per µL of blood.
After entering the circulation, approximately one-third migrate to the spleen for storage for later release in response
to any rupture in a blood vessel. They then become activated to perform their primary function, which is to limit
blood loss. Platelets remain only about 10 days, then are phagocytized by macrophages.
Platelets are critical to hemostasis, the stoppage of blood flow following damage to a vessel. They also secrete a
variety of growth factors essential for growth and repair of tissue, particularly connective tissue. Infusions of
concentrated platelets are now being used in some therapies to stimulate healing.
Disorders of Platelets
Thrombocytosis is a condition in which there are too many platelets. This may trigger formation of unwanted blood
clots (thrombosis), a potentially fatal disorder. If there is an insufficient number of platelets, called
thrombocytopenia, blood may not clot properly, and excessive bleeding may result.
732
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.12
Platelets
Platelets are derived from cells called megakaryocytes.
INTERACTIVE LINK
FIGURE 18.13
Leukocytes
(Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
View University of Michigan Webscopes (https://openstax.org/r/bloodsmear) and explore the blood slides in greater
detail. The Webscope feature allows you to move the slides as you would with a mechanical stage. You can increase
and decrease the magnification. There is a chance to review each of the leukocytes individually after you have
attempted to identify them from the first two blood smears. In addition, there are a few multiple choice questions.
Are you able to recognize and identify the various formed elements? You will need to do this is a systematic manner,
scanning along the image. The standard method is to use a grid, but this is not possible with this resource. Try
constructing a simple table with each leukocyte type and then making a mark for each cell type you identify.
Attempt to classify at least 50 and perhaps as many as 100 different cells. Based on the percentage of cells that you
count, do the numbers represent a normal blood smear or does something appear to be abnormal?
18.5 Hemostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the three mechanisms involved in hemostasis
•
Explain how the extrinsic and intrinsic coagulation pathways lead to the common pathway, and the coagulation
factors involved in each
•
Discuss disorders affecting hemostasis
Platelets are key players in hemostasis, the process by which the body seals a ruptured blood vessel and prevents
further loss of blood. Although rupture of larger vessels usually requires medical intervention, hemostasis is quite
effective in dealing with small, simple wounds. There are three steps to the process: vascular spasm, the formation
of a platelet plug, and coagulation (blood clotting). Failure of any of these steps will result in
hemorrhage—excessive bleeding.
18.5 • Hemostasis
733
Vascular Spasm
When a vessel is severed or punctured, or when the wall of a vessel is damaged, vascular spasm occurs. In vascular
spasm, the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessel contracts dramatically. This smooth muscle has both circular
layers; larger vessels also have longitudinal layers. The circular layers tend to constrict the flow of blood, whereas
the longitudinal layers, when present, draw the vessel back into the surrounding tissue, often making it more
difficult for a surgeon to locate, clamp, and tie off a severed vessel. The vascular spasm response is believed to be
triggered by several chemicals called endothelins that are released by vessel-lining cells and by pain receptors in
response to vessel injury. This phenomenon typically lasts for up to 30 minutes, although it can last for hours.
Formation of the Platelet Plug
In the second step, platelets, which normally float free in the plasma, encounter the area of vessel rupture with the
exposed underlying connective tissue and collagenous fibers. The platelets begin to clump together, become spiked
and sticky, and bind to the exposed collagen and endothelial lining. This process is assisted by a glycoprotein in the
blood plasma called von Willebrand factor, which helps stabilize the growing platelet plug. As platelets collect, they
simultaneously release chemicals from their granules into the plasma that further contribute to hemostasis. Among
the substances released by the platelets are:
•
adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which helps additional platelets to adhere to the injury site, reinforcing and
expanding the platelet plug
•
serotonin, which maintains vasoconstriction
•
prostaglandins and phospholipids, which also maintain vasoconstriction and help to activate further clotting
chemicals, as discussed next
A platelet plug can temporarily seal a small opening in a blood vessel. Plug formation, in essence, buys the body
time while more sophisticated and durable repairs are being made. In a similar manner, even modern naval
warships still carry an assortment of wooden plugs to temporarily repair small breaches in their hulls until
permanent repairs can be made.
Coagulation
Those more sophisticated and more durable repairs are collectively called coagulation, the formation of a blood
clot. The process is sometimes characterized as a cascade, because one event prompts the next as in a multi-level
waterfall. The result is the production of a gelatinous but robust clot made up of a mesh of fibrin—an insoluble
filamentous protein derived from fibrinogen, the plasma protein introduced earlier—in which platelets and blood
cells are trapped. Figure 18.14 summarizes the three steps of hemostasis.
734
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 18.14
Hemostasis
(a) An injury to a blood vessel initiates the process of hemostasis. Blood clotting involves three steps. First,
vascular spasm constricts the flow of blood. Next, a platelet plug forms to temporarily seal small openings in the vessel. Coagulation then
enables the repair of the vessel wall once the leakage of blood has stopped. (b) The synthesis of fibrin in blood clots involves either an
intrinsic pathway or an extrinsic pathway, both of which lead to a common pathway. (credit a: Kevin MacKenzie)
Clotting Factors Involved in Coagulation
In the coagulation cascade, chemicals called clotting factors (or coagulation factors) prompt reactions that activate
still more coagulation factors. The process is complex, but is initiated along two basic pathways:
•
The extrinsic pathway, which normally is triggered by trauma.
•
The intrinsic pathway, which begins in the bloodstream and is triggered by internal damage to the wall of the
vessel.
18.5 • Hemostasis
735
Both of these merge into a third pathway, referred to as the common pathway (see Figure 18.14b). All three
pathways are dependent upon the 12 known clotting factors, including Ca2+ and vitamin K (Table 18.1). Clotting
factors are secreted primarily by the liver and the platelets. The liver requires the fat-soluble vitamin K to produce
many of them. Vitamin K (along with biotin and folate) is somewhat unusual among vitamins in that it is not only
consumed in the diet but is also synthesized by bacteria residing in the large intestine. The calcium ion, considered
factor IV, is derived from the diet and from the breakdown of bone. Some recent evidence indicates that activation
of various clotting factors occurs on specific receptor sites on the surfaces of platelets.
The 12 clotting factors are numbered I through XIII according to the order of their discovery. Factor VI was once
believed to be a distinct clotting factor, but is now thought to be identical to factor V. Rather than renumber the
other factors, factor VI was allowed to remain as a placeholder and also a reminder that knowledge changes over
time.
Clotting Factors
Factor
number
Name
Type of
molecule
Source
Pathway(s)
I
Fibrinogen
Plasma
protein
Liver
Common; converted into fibrin
II
Prothrombin
Plasma
protein
Liver*
Common; converted into
thrombin
III
Tissue thromboplastin or tissue
factor
Lipoprotein
mixture
Damaged cells
and platelets
Extrinsic
IV
Calcium ions
Inorganic
ions in
plasma
Diet, platelets,
bone matrix
Entire process
V
Proaccelerin
Plasma
protein
Liver, platelets
Extrinsic and intrinsic
VI
Not used
Not used
Not used
Not used
VII
Proconvertin
Plasma
protein
Liver *
Extrinsic
VIII
Antihemolytic factor A
Plasma
protein
factor
Platelets and
endothelial
cells
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia A
IX
Antihemolytic factor B (plasma
thromboplastin component)
Plasma
protein
Liver*
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia B
X
Stuart–Prower factor
(thrombokinase)
Protein
Liver*
Extrinsic and intrinsic
XI
Antihemolytic factor C (plasma
thromboplastin antecedent)
Plasma
protein
Liver
Intrinsic; deficiency results in
hemophilia C
TABLE 18.1 *Vitamin K required.
736
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
Factor
number
Name
Type of
molecule
Source
Pathway(s)
XII
Hageman factor
Plasma
protein
Liver
Intrinsic; initiates clotting in
vitro also activates plasmin
XIII
Fibrin-stabilizing factor
Plasma
protein
Liver, platelets
Stabilizes fibrin; slows
fibrinolysis
TABLE 18.1 *Vitamin K required.
Extrinsic Pathway
The quicker responding and more direct extrinsic pathway (also known as the tissue factor pathway) begins when
damage occurs to the surrounding tissues, such as in a traumatic injury. Upon contact with blood plasma, the
damaged extravascular cells, which are extrinsic to the bloodstream, release factor III (thromboplastin).
Sequentially, Ca2+ then factor VII (proconvertin), which is activated by factor III, are added, forming an enzyme
complex. This enzyme complex leads to activation of factor X (Stuart–Prower factor), which activates the common
pathway discussed below. The events in the extrinsic pathway are completed in a matter of seconds.
Intrinsic Pathway
The intrinsic pathway (also known as the contact activation pathway) is longer and more complex. In this case, the
factors involved are intrinsic to (present within) the bloodstream. The pathway can be prompted by damage to the
tissues, resulting from internal factors such as arterial disease; however, it is most often initiated when factor XII
(Hageman factor) comes into contact with foreign materials, such as when a blood sample is put into a glass test
tube. Within the body, factor XII is typically activated when it encounters negatively charged molecules, such as
inorganic polymers and phosphate produced earlier in the series of intrinsic pathway reactions. Factor XII sets off a
series of reactions that in turn activates factor XI (antihemolytic factor C or plasma thromboplastin antecedent) then
factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin). In the meantime, chemicals released by the platelets
increase the rate of these activation reactions. Finally, factor VIII (antihemolytic factor A) from the platelets and
endothelial cells combines with factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin) to form an enzyme
complex that activates factor X (Stuart–Prower factor or thrombokinase), leading to the common pathway. The
events in the intrinsic pathway are completed in a few minutes.
Common Pathway
Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways lead to the common pathway, in which fibrin is produced to seal off the
vessel. Once factor X has been activated by either the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway, the enzyme prothrombinase
converts factor II, the inactive enzyme prothrombin, into the active enzyme thrombin. (Note that if the enzyme
thrombin were not normally in an inactive form, clots would form spontaneously, a condition not consistent with
life.) Then, thrombin converts factor I, the soluble fibrinogen, into the insoluble fibrin protein strands. Factor XIII
then stabilizes the fibrin clot.
Fibrinolysis
The stabilized clot is acted upon by contractile proteins within the platelets. As these proteins contract, they pull on
the fibrin threads, bringing the edges of the clot more tightly together, somewhat as we do when tightening loose
shoelaces (see Figure 18.14a). This process also wrings out of the clot a small amount of fluid called serum, which
is blood plasma without its clotting factors.
To restore normal blood flow as the vessel heals, the clot must eventually be removed. Fibrinolysis is the gradual
degradation of the clot. Again, there is a fairly complicated series of reactions that involves factor XII and protein-
catabolizing enzymes. During this process, the inactive protein plasminogen is converted into the active plasmin,
which gradually breaks down the fibrin of the clot. Additionally, bradykinin, a vasodilator, is released, reversing the
effects of the serotonin and prostaglandins from the platelets. This allows the smooth muscle in the walls of the
vessels to relax and helps to restore the circulation.
18.5 • Hemostasis
737
Plasma Anticoagulants
An anticoagulant is any substance that opposes coagulation. Several circulating plasma anticoagulants play a role
in limiting the coagulation process to the region of injury and restoring a normal, clot-free condition of blood. For
instance, a cluster of proteins collectively referred to as the protein C system inactivates clotting factors involved in
the intrinsic pathway. TFPI (tissue factor pathway inhibitor) inhibits the conversion of the inactive factor VII to the
active form in the extrinsic pathway. Antithrombin inactivates factor X and opposes the conversion of prothrombin
(factor II) to thrombin in the common pathway. And as noted earlier, basophils release heparin, a short-acting
anticoagulant that also opposes prothrombin. Heparin is also found on the surfaces of cells lining the blood vessels.
A pharmaceutical form of heparin is often administered therapeutically, for example, in surgical patients at risk for
blood clots.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View these animations (http://openstax.org/l/coagulation) to explore the intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways
that are involved the process of coagulation. The coagulation cascade restores hemostasis by activating coagulation
factors in the presence of an injury. How does the endothelium of the blood vessel walls prevent the blood from
coagulating as it flows through the blood vessels?
Disorders of Clotting
Either an insufficient or an excessive production of platelets can lead to severe disease or death. As discussed
earlier, an insufficient number of platelets, called thrombocytopenia, typically results in the inability of blood to form
clots. This can lead to excessive bleeding, even from minor wounds.
Another reason for failure of the blood to clot is the inadequate production of functional amounts of one or more
clotting factors. This is the case in the genetic disorder hemophilia, which is actually a group of related disorders,
the most common of which is hemophilia A, accounting for approximately 80 percent of cases. This disorder results
in the inability to synthesize sufficient quantities of factor VIII. Hemophilia B is the second most common form,
accounting for approximately 20 percent of cases. In this case, there is a deficiency of factor IX. Both of these
defects are linked to the X chromosome and are typically passed from a healthy (carrier) female to their male
offspring, since males are XY. Females would need to inherit a defective gene from each parent to manifest the
disease, since they are XX. Patients with hemophilia bleed from even minor internal and external wounds, and leak
blood into joint spaces after exercise and into urine and stool. Hemophilia C is a rare condition that is triggered by an
autosomal (not sex) chromosome that renders factor XI nonfunctional. It is not a true recessive condition, since
even individuals with a single copy of the mutant gene show a tendency to bleed. Regular infusions of clotting
factors isolated from healthy donors can help prevent bleeding in hemophiliac patients. At some point, genetic
therapy will become a viable option.
In contrast to the disorders characterized by coagulation failure is thrombocytosis, also mentioned earlier, a
condition characterized by excessive numbers of platelets that increases the risk for excessive clot formation, a
condition known as thrombosis. A thrombus (plural = thrombi) is an aggregation of platelets, erythrocytes, and
even WBCs typically trapped within a mass of fibrin strands. While the formation of a clot is normal following the
hemostatic mechanism just described, thrombi can form within an intact or only slightly damaged blood vessel. In a
large vessel, a thrombus will adhere to the vessel wall and decrease the flow of blood, and is referred to as a mural
thrombus. In a small vessel, it may actually totally block the flow of blood and is termed an occlusive thrombus.
Thrombi are most commonly caused by vessel damage to the endothelial lining, which activates the clotting
mechanism. These may include venous stasis, when blood in the veins, particularly in the legs, remains stationary
for long periods. This is one of the dangers of long airplane flights in crowded conditions and may lead to deep vein
thrombosis. Thrombophilia, also called hypercoagulation, is a condition in which there is a tendency to form
thrombosis. This may be familial (genetic) or acquired. Acquired forms include the autoimmune disease lupus,
immune reactions to heparin, polycythemia vera, thrombocytosis, sickle cell disease, pregnancy, and even obesity. A
thrombus can seriously impede blood flow to or from a region and will cause a local increase in blood pressure. If
flow is to be maintained, the heart will need to generate a greater pressure to overcome the resistance.
When a portion of a thrombus breaks free from the vessel wall and enters the circulation, it is referred to as an
738
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
embolus. An embolus that is carried through the bloodstream can be large enough to block a vessel critical to a
major organ. When it becomes trapped, an embolus is called an embolism. In the heart, brain, or lungs, an
embolism may accordingly cause a heart attack, a stroke, or a pulmonary embolism. These are medical
emergencies.
Among the many known biochemical activities of aspirin is its role as an anticoagulant. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
is very effective at inhibiting the aggregation of platelets. It is routinely administered during a heart attack or stroke
to reduce the adverse effects. Physicians sometimes recommend that patients at risk for cardiovascular disease
take a low dose of aspirin on a daily basis as a preventive measure. However, aspirin can also lead to serious side
effects, including increasing the risk of ulcers. A patient is well advised to consult a physician before beginning any
aspirin regimen.
A class of drugs collectively known as thrombolytic agents can help speed up the degradation of an abnormal clot. If
a thrombolytic agent is administered to a patient within 3 hours following a thrombotic stroke, the patient’s
prognosis improves significantly. However, some strokes are not caused by thrombi, but by hemorrhage. Thus, the
cause must be determined before treatment begins. Tissue plasminogen activator is an enzyme that catalyzes the
conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, the primary enzyme that breaks down clots. It is released naturally by
endothelial cells but is also used in clinical medicine. New research is progressing using compounds isolated from
the venom of some species of snakes, particularly vipers and cobras, which may eventually have therapeutic value
as thrombolytic agents.
18.6 Blood Typing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the two basic physiological consequences of transfusion of incompatible blood
•
Compare and contrast ABO and Rh blood groups
•
Identify which blood groups may be safely transfused into patients with different ABO types
•
Discuss the pathophysiology of hemolytic disease of the newborn
Blood transfusions in humans were risky procedures until the discovery of the major human blood groups by Karl
Landsteiner, an Austrian biologist and physician, in 1900. Until that point, physicians did not understand that death
sometimes followed blood transfusions, when the type of donor blood infused into the patient was incompatible
with the patient’s own blood. Blood groups are determined by the presence or absence of specific marker molecules
on the plasma membranes of erythrocytes. With their discovery, it became possible for the first time to match
patient-donor blood types and prevent transfusion reactions and deaths.
Antigens, Antibodies, and Transfusion Reactions
Antigens are substances that the body does not recognize as belonging to the “self” and that therefore trigger a
defensive response from the leukocytes of the immune system. (Seek more content for additional information on
immunity.) Here, we will focus on the role of immunity in blood transfusion reactions. With RBCs in particular, you
may see the antigens referred to as isoantigens or agglutinogens (surface antigens) and the antibodies referred to as
isoantibodies or agglutinins. In this chapter, we will use the more common terms antigens and antibodies.
Antigens are generally large proteins, but may include other classes of organic molecules, including carbohydrates,
lipids, and nucleic acids. Following an infusion of incompatible blood, erythrocytes with foreign antigens appear in
the bloodstream and trigger an immune response. Proteins called antibodies (immunoglobulins), which are
produced by certain B lymphocytes called plasma cells, attach to the antigens on the plasma membranes of the
infused erythrocytes and cause them to adhere to one another.
•
Because the arms of the Y-shaped antibodies attach randomly to more than one nonself erythrocyte surface,
they form clumps of erythrocytes. This process is called agglutination.
•
The clumps of erythrocytes block small blood vessels throughout the body, depriving tissues of oxygen and
nutrients.
•
As the erythrocyte clumps are degraded, in a process called hemolysis, their hemoglobin is released into the
bloodstream. This hemoglobin travels to the kidneys, which are responsible for filtration of the blood. However,
18.6 • Blood Typing
739
the load of hemoglobin released can easily overwhelm the kidney’s capacity to clear it, and the patient can
quickly develop kidney failure.
More than 50 antigens have been identified on erythrocyte membranes, but the most significant in terms of their
potential harm to patients are classified in two groups: the ABO blood group and the Rh blood group.
The ABO Blood Group
Although the ABO blood group name consists of three letters, ABO blood typing designates the presence or
absence of just two antigens, A and B. Both are glycoproteins. People whose erythrocytes have A antigens on their
erythrocyte membrane surfaces are designated blood type A, and those whose erythrocytes have B antigens are
blood type B. People can also have both A and B antigens on their erythrocytes, in which case they are blood type
AB. People with neither A nor B antigens are designated blood type O. ABO blood types are genetically determined.
The body must be exposed to a foreign antigen before an antibody can be produced. ABO blood group antigens are
found in foods and microbes throughout nature. Thus, the human immune system is exposed to A and B antigens at
an early age and antibodies are formed naturally. Individuals with type A blood—without any prior exposure to
incompatible blood—have naturally-formed antibodies to the B antigen circulating in their blood plasma. These
antibodies, referred to as anti-B antibodies, will cause agglutination and hemolysis if they ever encounter
erythrocytes with B antigens. Similarly, an individual with type B blood has naturally-formed anti-A antibodies.
Individuals with type AB blood, which has both antigens, do not have naturally-formed antibodies to either of these.
People with type O blood lack antigens A and B on their erythrocytes, but both anti-A and anti-B antibodies circulate
in their blood plasma.
Rh Blood Groups
The Rh blood group is classified according to the presence or absence of a second erythrocyte antigen identified as
Rh. (It was first discovered in a type of primate known as a rhesus macaque, which is often used in research,
because its blood is similar to that of humans.) Although dozens of Rh antigens have been identified, only one,
designated D, is clinically important. Those who have the Rh D antigen present on their erythrocytes—about 85
percent of Americans—are described as Rh positive (Rh+) and those who lack it are Rh negative (Rh−). Note that the
Rh group is distinct from the ABO group, so any individual, no matter their ABO blood type, may have or lack this Rh
antigen. When identifying a patient’s blood type, the Rh group is designated by adding the word positive or negative
to the ABO type. For example, A positive (A+) means ABO group A blood with the Rh antigen present, and AB
negative (AB−) means ABO group AB blood without the Rh antigen.
Table 18.2 summarizes the distribution of the ABO and Rh blood types within the United States.
Summary of ABO and Rh Blood Types within the United States
Blood Type
Asian
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
North American Indian
White non-Hispanic
A+
27.3
24.0
28.7
31.3
33.0
A−
0.5
1.9
2.4
3.8
6.8
B+
25.0
18.4
9.2
7.0
9.1
B−
0.4
1.3
0.7
0.9
1.8
AB+
7.0
4.0
2.3
2.2
3.4
AB−
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.7
TABLE 18.2
740
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
Blood Type
Asian
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
North American Indian
White non-Hispanic
O+
39.0
46.6
52.6
50.0
37.2
O−
0.7
3.6
3.9
4.7
8.0
TABLE 18.2
In contrast to the ABO group antibodies, which are preformed, antibodies to the Rh antigen are produced only in Rh−
individuals after exposure to the antigen. This process, called sensitization, occurs following a transfusion with Rh-
incompatible blood or, more commonly, with the birth of an Rh+ baby to an Rh− person. Problems are rare in a first
pregnancy, since the baby’s Rh+ cells rarely cross the placenta (the organ of gas and nutrient exchange between the
fetus and the pregnant person). However, during or immediately after birth, the Rh− parent can be exposed to the
baby’s Rh+ cells (Figure 18.15). Research has shown that this occurs in about 13−14 percent of such pregnancies.
After exposure, the immune system of the person who has given birth begins to generate anti-Rh antibodies. If the
same person should then become pregnant with another Rh+ baby, the Rh antibodies they have produced can cross
the placenta into the fetal bloodstream and destroy the fetal RBCs. This condition, known as hemolytic disease of
the newborn (HDN) or erythroblastosis fetalis, may cause anemia in mild cases, but the agglutination and
hemolysis can be so severe that without treatment the fetus may die in the womb or shortly after birth.
FIGURE 18.15
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
The first exposure of an Rh− person to Rh+ erythrocytes during pregnancy induces
18.6 • Blood Typing
741
sensitization. Anti-Rh antibodies begin to circulate in the pregnant person's bloodstream. A second exposure occurs with a subsequent
pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus in the uterus. During that subsequent pregnancy, the pregnant person's anti-Rh antibodies may cross the
placenta and enter the fetal bloodstream, causing agglutination and hemolysis of fetal erythrocytes.
A drug known as RhoGAM, short for Rh immune globulin, can temporarily prevent the development of Rh antibodies
in the Rh− parent, thereby averting this potentially serious disease for the fetus. RhoGAM antibodies destroy any
fetal Rh+ erythrocytes that may cross the placental barrier. RhoGAM is normally administered to Rh− pregnant
people during weeks 26−28 of pregnancy and within 72 hours following birth. It has proven remarkably effective in
decreasing the incidence of HDN. Earlier we noted that the incidence of HDN in an Rh+ subsequent pregnancy to an
Rh− person is about 13–14 percent without preventive treatment. Since the introduction of RhoGAM in 1968, the
incidence has dropped to about 0.1 percent in the United States.
Determining ABO Blood Types
Clinicians are able to determine a patient’s blood type quickly and easily using commercially prepared antibodies.
An unknown blood sample is allocated into separate wells. Into one well a small amount of anti-A antibody is
added, and to another a small amount of anti-B antibody. If the antigen is present, the antibodies will cause visible
agglutination of the cells (Figure 18.16). The blood should also be tested for Rh antibodies.
FIGURE 18.16
Cross Matching Blood Types
This sample of a commercially produced “bedside” card enables quick typing of both a
recipient’s and donor’s blood before transfusion. The card contains three reaction sites or wells. One is coated with an anti-A antibody, one
with an anti-B antibody, and one with an anti-D antibody (tests for the presence of Rh factor D). Mixing a drop of blood and saline into each
well enables the blood to interact with a preparation of type-specific antibodies, also called anti-seras. Agglutination of RBCs in a given site
indicates a positive identification of the blood antigens, in this case A and Rh antigens for blood type A+. For the purpose of transfusion, the
donor’s and recipient’s blood types must match.
ABO Transfusion Protocols
To avoid transfusion reactions, it is best to transfuse only matching blood types; that is, a type B+ recipient should
ideally receive blood only from a type B+ donor and so on. That said, in emergency situations, when acute
hemorrhage threatens the patient’s life, there may not be time for cross matching to identify blood type. In these
cases, blood from a universal donor—an individual with type O− blood—may be transfused. Recall that type O
erythrocytes do not display A or B antigens. Thus, anti-A or anti-B antibodies that might be circulating in the
patient’s blood plasma will not encounter any erythrocyte surface antigens on the donated blood and therefore will
not be provoked into a response. One problem with this designation of universal donor is if the O− individual had
prior exposure to Rh antigen, Rh antibodies may be present in the donated blood. Also, introducing type O blood into
an individual with type A, B, or AB blood will nevertheless introduce antibodies against both A and B antigens, as
these are always circulating in the type O blood plasma. This may cause problems for the recipient, but because the
volume of blood transfused is much lower than the volume of the patient’s own blood, the adverse effects of the
relatively few infused plasma antibodies are typically limited. Rh factor also plays a role. If Rh− individuals receiving
blood have had prior exposure to Rh antigen, antibodies for this antigen may be present in the blood and trigger
agglutination to some degree. Although it is always preferable to cross match a patient’s blood before transfusing, in
a true life-threatening emergency situation, this is not always possible, and these procedures may be implemented.
A patient with blood type AB+ is known as the universal recipient. This patient can theoretically receive any type of
blood, because the patient’s own blood—having both A and B antigens on the erythrocyte surface—does not
produce anti-A or anti-B antibodies. In addition, an Rh+ patient can receive both Rh+ and Rh− blood. However, keep
in mind that the donor’s blood will contain circulating antibodies, again with possible negative implications. Figure
18.17 summarizes the blood types and compatibilities.
742
18 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood
Access for free at openstax.org
At the scene of multiple-vehicle accidents, military engagements, and natural or human-caused disasters, many
victims may suffer simultaneously from acute hemorrhage, yet type O blood may not be immediately available. In
these circumstances, medics may at least try to replace some of the volume of blood that has been lost. This is done
by intravenous administration of a saline solution that provides fluids and electrolytes in proportions equivalent to
those of normal blood plasma. Research is ongoing to develop a safe and effective artificial blood that would carry
out the oxygen-carrying function of blood without the RBCs, enabling transfusions in the field without concern for
incompatibility. These blood substitutes normally contain hemoglobin- as well as perfluorocarbon-based oxygen
carriers.
FIGURE 18.17
ABO Blood Group
This chart summarizes the characteristics of the blood types in the ABO blood group. See the text for
more on the concept of a universal donor or recipient.
18.6 • Blood Typing
743
Key Terms
ABO blood group
blood-type classification based on
the presence or absence of A and B glycoproteins on
the erythrocyte membrane surface
agglutination
clustering of cells into masses linked
by antibodies
agranular leukocytes
leukocytes with few granules
in their cytoplasm; specifically, monocytes,
lymphocytes, and NK cells
albumin
most abundant plasma protein, accounting
for most of the osmotic pressure of plasma
anemia
deficiency of red blood cells or hemoglobin
antibodies
(also, immunoglobulins or gamma
globulins) antigen-specific proteins produced by
specialized B lymphocytes that protect the body by
binding to foreign objects such as bacteria and
viruses
anticoagulant
substance such as heparin that
opposes coagulation
antithrombin
anticoagulant that inactivates factor X
and opposes the conversion of prothrombin (factor
II) into thrombin in the common pathway
B lymphocytes
(also, B cells) lymphocytes that
defend the body against specific pathogens and
thereby provide specific immunity
basophils
granulocytes that stain with a basic
(alkaline) stain and store histamine and heparin
bilirubin
yellowish bile pigment produced when iron
is removed from heme and is further broken down
into waste products
biliverdin
green bile pigment produced when the
non-iron portion of heme is degraded into a waste
product; converted to bilirubin in the liver
blood
liquid connective tissue composed of formed
elements—erythrocytes, leukocytes, and
platelets—and a fluid extracellular matrix called
plasma; component of the cardiovascular system
bone marrow biopsy
diagnostic test of a sample of
red bone marrow
bone marrow transplant
treatment in which a
donor’s healthy bone marrow with its stem cells
replaces diseased or damaged bone marrow of a
patient
bruise
localized bleeding under the skin due to
damaged blood vessels
buffy coat
thin, pale layer of leukocytes and platelets
that separates the erythrocytes from the plasma in a
sample of centrifuged blood
carbaminohemoglobin
compound of carbon dioxide
and hemoglobin, and one of the ways in which
carbon dioxide is carried in the blood
clotting factors
group of 12 identified substances
active in coagulation
coagulation
formation of a blood clot; part of the
process of hemostasis
colony-stimulating factors (CSFs)
glycoproteins that
trigger the proliferation and differentiation of
myeloblasts into granular leukocytes (basophils,
neutrophils, and eosinophils)
common pathway
final coagulation pathway
activated either by the intrinsic or the extrinsic
pathway, and ending in the formation of a blood clot
cross matching
blood test for identification of blood
type using antibodies and small samples of blood
cytokines
class of proteins that act as autocrine or
paracrine signaling molecules; in the cardiovascular
system, they stimulate the proliferation of
progenitor cells and help to stimulate both
nonspecific and specific resistance to disease
defensins
antimicrobial proteins released from
neutrophils and macrophages that create openings
in the plasma membranes to kill cells
deoxyhemoglobin
molecule of hemoglobin without
an oxygen molecule bound to it
diapedesis
(also, emigration) process by which
leukocytes squeeze through adjacent cells in a
blood vessel wall to enter tissues
embolus
thrombus that has broken free from the
blood vessel wall and entered the circulation
emigration
(also, diapedesis) process by which
leukocytes squeeze through adjacent cells in a
blood vessel wall to enter tissues
eosinophils
granulocytes that stain with eosin; they
release antihistamines and are especially active
against parasitic worms
erythrocyte
(also, red blood cell) mature myeloid
blood cell that is composed mostly of hemoglobin
and functions primarily in the transportation of
oxygen and carbon dioxide
erythropoietin (EPO)
glycoprotein that triggers the
bone marrow to produce RBCs; secreted by the
kidney in response to low oxygen levels
extrinsic pathway
initial coagulation pathway that
begins with tissue damage and results in the
activation of the common pathway
ferritin
protein-containing storage form of iron found
in the bone marrow, liver, and spleen
fibrin
insoluble, filamentous protein that forms the
structure of a blood clot
fibrinogen
plasma protein produced in the liver and
involved in blood clotting
fibrinolysis
gradual degradation of a blood clot
formed elements
cellular components of blood; that
is, erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets
globin
heme-containing globular protein that is a
744
18 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
constituent of hemoglobin
globulins
heterogeneous group of plasma proteins
that includes transport proteins, clotting factors,
immune proteins, and others
granular leukocytes
leukocytes with abundant
granules in their cytoplasm; specifically,
neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils
hematocrit
(also, packed cell volume) volume
percentage of erythrocytes in a sample of
centrifuged blood
hematopoietic stem cell
type of pluripotent stem cell
that gives rise to the formed elements of blood
(hemocytoblast)
heme
red, iron-containing pigment to which oxygen
binds in hemoglobin
hemocytoblast
hematopoietic stem cell that gives
rise to the formed elements of blood
hemoglobin
oxygen-carrying compound in
erythrocytes
hemolysis
destruction (lysis) of erythrocytes and the
release of their hemoglobin into circulation
hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN)
(also,
erythroblastosis fetalis) disorder causing
agglutination and hemolysis in an Rh+ fetus or
newborn of an Rh− person
hemophilia
genetic disorder characterized by
inadequate synthesis of clotting factors
hemopoiesis
production of the formed elements of
blood
hemopoietic growth factors
chemical signals
including erythropoietin, thrombopoietin, colony-
stimulating factors, and interleukins that regulate
the differentiation and proliferation of particular
blood progenitor cells
hemorrhage
excessive bleeding
hemosiderin
protein-containing storage form of iron
found in the bone marrow, liver, and spleen
hemostasis
physiological process by which bleeding
ceases
heparin
short-acting anticoagulant stored in mast
cells and released when tissues are injured,
opposes prothrombin
hypoxemia
below-normal level of oxygen saturation
of blood (typically <95 percent)
immunoglobulins
(also, antibodies or gamma
globulins) antigen-specific proteins produced by
specialized B lymphocytes that protect the body by
binding to foreign objects such as bacteria and
viruses
interleukins
signaling molecules that may function in
hemopoiesis, inflammation, and specific immune
responses
intrinsic pathway
initial coagulation pathway that
begins with vascular damage or contact with foreign
substances, and results in the activation of the
common pathway
jaundice
yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes
due to excess bilirubin in the blood
leukemia
cancer involving leukocytes
leukocyte
(also, white blood cell) colorless,
nucleated blood cell, the chief function of which is
to protect the body from disease
leukocytosis
excessive leukocyte proliferation
leukopenia
below-normal production of leukocytes
lymphocytes
agranular leukocytes of the lymphoid
stem cell line, many of which function in specific
immunity
lymphoid stem cells
type of hematopoietic stem
cells that gives rise to lymphocytes, including
various T cells, B cells, and NK cells, all of which
function in immunity
lymphoma
form of cancer in which masses of
malignant T and/or B lymphocytes collect in lymph
nodes, the spleen, the liver, and other tissues
lysozyme
digestive enzyme with bactericidal
properties
macrophage
phagocytic cell of the myeloid lineage; a
matured monocyte
megakaryocyte
bone marrow cell that produces
platelets
memory cell
type of B or T lymphocyte that forms
after exposure to a pathogen
monocytes
agranular leukocytes of the myeloid stem
cell line that circulate in the bloodstream; tissue
monocytes are macrophages
myeloid stem cells
type of hematopoietic stem cell
that gives rise to some formed elements, including
erythrocytes, megakaryocytes that produce
platelets, and a myeloblast lineage that gives rise to
monocytes and three forms of granular leukocytes
(neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils)
natural killer (NK) cells
cytotoxic lymphocytes
capable of recognizing cells that do not express
“self” proteins on their plasma membrane or that
contain foreign or abnormal markers; provide
generalized, nonspecific immunity
neutrophils
granulocytes that stain with a neutral dye
and are the most numerous of the leukocytes;
especially active against bacteria
oxyhemoglobin
molecule of hemoglobin to which
oxygen is bound
packed cell volume (PCV)
(also, hematocrit) volume
percentage of erythrocytes present in a sample of
centrifuged blood
plasma
in blood, the liquid extracellular matrix
composed mostly of water that circulates the
18 • Key Terms
745
formed elements and dissolved materials
throughout the cardiovascular system
plasmin
blood protein active in fibrinolysis
platelet plug
accumulation and adhesion of platelets
at the site of blood vessel injury
platelets
(also, thrombocytes) one of the formed
elements of blood that consists of cell fragments
broken off from megakaryocytes
pluripotent stem cell
stem cell that derives from
totipotent stem cells and is capable of
differentiating into many, but not all, cell types
polycythemia
elevated level of hemoglobin, whether
adaptive or pathological
polymorphonuclear
having a lobed nucleus, as seen
in some leukocytes
positive chemotaxis
process in which a cell is
attracted to move in the direction of chemical
stimuli
red blood cells (RBCs)
(also, erythrocytes) one of the
formed elements of blood that transports oxygen
reticulocyte
immature erythrocyte that may still
contain fragments of organelles
Rh blood group
blood-type classification based on
the presence or absence of the antigen Rh on the
erythrocyte membrane surface
serum
blood plasma that does not contain clotting
factors
sickle cell disease
(also, sickle cell anemia) inherited
blood disorder in which hemoglobin molecules are
malformed, leading to the breakdown of RBCs that
take on a characteristic sickle shape
T lymphocytes
(also, T cells) lymphocytes that
provide cellular-level immunity by physically
attacking foreign or diseased cells
thalassemia
inherited blood disorder in which
maturation of RBCs does not proceed normally,
leading to abnormal formation of hemoglobin and
the destruction of RBCs
thrombin
enzyme essential for the final steps in
formation of a fibrin clot
thrombocytes
platelets, one of the formed elements
of blood that consists of cell fragments broken off
from megakaryocytes
thrombocytopenia
condition in which there are too
few platelets, resulting in abnormal bleeding
(hemophilia)
thrombocytosis
condition in which there are too
many platelets, resulting in abnormal clotting
(thrombosis)
thrombopoietin
hormone secreted by the liver and
kidneys that prompts the development of
megakaryocytes into thrombocytes (platelets)
thrombosis
excessive clot formation
thrombus
aggregation of fibrin, platelets, and
erythrocytes in an intact artery or vein
tissue factor
protein thromboplastin, which initiates
the extrinsic pathway when released in response to
tissue damage
totipotent stem cell
embryonic stem cell that is
capable of differentiating into any and all cells of the
body; enabling the full development of an organism
transferrin
plasma protein that binds reversibly to
iron and distributes it throughout the body
universal donor
individual with type O− blood
universal recipient
individual with type AB+ blood
vascular spasm
initial step in hemostasis, in which
the smooth muscle in the walls of the ruptured or
damaged blood vessel contracts
white blood cells (WBCs)
(also, leukocytes) one of
the formed elements of blood that provides defense
against disease agents and foreign materials
Chapter Review
18.1 An Overview of Blood
Blood is a fluid connective tissue critical to the
transportation of nutrients, gases, and wastes
throughout the body; to defend the body against
infection and other threats; and to the homeostatic
regulation of pH, temperature, and other internal
conditions. Blood is composed of formed
elements—erythrocytes, leukocytes, and cell fragments
called platelets—and a fluid extracellular matrix called
plasma. More than 90 percent of plasma is water. The
remainder is mostly plasma proteins—mainly albumin,
globulins, and fibrinogen—and other dissolved solutes
such as glucose, lipids, electrolytes, and dissolved
gases. Because of the formed elements and the
plasma proteins and other solutes, blood is sticky and
more viscous than water. It is also slightly alkaline, and
its temperature is slightly higher than normal body
temperature.
18.2 Production of the Formed Elements
Through the process of hemopoiesis, the formed
elements of blood are continually produced, replacing
the relatively short-lived erythrocytes, leukocytes, and
platelets. Hemopoiesis begins in the red bone marrow,
with hematopoietic stem cells that differentiate into
myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Myeloid stem cells give
rise to most of the formed elements. Lymphoid stem
cells give rise only to the various lymphocytes
designated as B and T cells, and NK cells. Hemopoietic
growth factors, including erythropoietin,
746
18 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
thrombopoietin, colony-stimulating factors, and
interleukins, promote the proliferation and
differentiation of formed elements.
18.3 Erythrocytes
The most abundant formed elements in blood,
erythrocytes are red, biconcave disks packed with an
oxygen-carrying compound called hemoglobin. The
hemoglobin molecule contains four globin proteins
bound to a pigment molecule called heme, which
contains an ion of iron. In the bloodstream, iron picks
up oxygen in the lungs and drops it off in the tissues;
the amino acids in hemoglobin then transport carbon
dioxide from the tissues back to the lungs.
Erythrocytes live only 120 days on average, and thus
must be continually replaced. Worn-out erythrocytes
are phagocytized by macrophages and their
hemoglobin is broken down. The breakdown products
are recycled or removed as wastes: Globin is broken
down into amino acids for synthesis of new proteins;
iron is stored in the liver or spleen or used by the bone
marrow for production of new erythrocytes; and the
remnants of heme are converted into bilirubin, or other
waste products that are taken up by the liver and
excreted in the bile or removed by the kidneys. Anemia
is a deficiency of RBCs or hemoglobin, whereas
polycythemia is an excess of RBCs.
18.4 Leukocytes and Platelets
Leukocytes function in body defenses. They squeeze
out of the walls of blood vessels through emigration or
diapedesis, then may move through tissue fluid or
become attached to various organs where they fight
against pathogenic organisms, diseased cells, or other
threats to health. Granular leukocytes, which include
neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils, originate with
myeloid stem cells, as do the agranular monocytes.
The other agranular leukocytes, NK cells, B cells, and T
cells, arise from the lymphoid stem cell line. The most
abundant leukocytes are the neutrophils, which are
first responders to infections, especially with bacteria.
About 20–30 percent of all leukocytes are
lymphocytes, which are critical to the body’s defense
against specific threats. Leukemia and lymphoma are
malignancies involving leukocytes. Platelets are
fragments of cells known as megakaryocytes that dwell
within the bone marrow. While many platelets are
stored in the spleen, others enter the circulation and
are essential for hemostasis; they also produce several
growth factors important for repair and healing.
18.5 Hemostasis
Hemostasis is the physiological process by which
bleeding ceases. Hemostasis involves three basic
steps: vascular spasm, the formation of a platelet plug,
and coagulation, in which clotting factors promote the
formation of a fibrin clot. Fibrinolysis is the process in
which a clot is degraded in a healing vessel.
Anticoagulants are substances that oppose
coagulation. They are important in limiting the extent
and duration of clotting. Inadequate clotting can result
from too few platelets, or inadequate production of
clotting factors, for instance, in the genetic disorder
hemophilia. Excessive clotting, called thrombosis, can
be caused by excessive numbers of platelets. A
thrombus is a collection of fibrin, platelets, and
erythrocytes that has accumulated along the lining of a
blood vessel, whereas an embolus is a thrombus that
has broken free from the vessel wall and is circulating
in the bloodstream.
18.6 Blood Typing
Antigens are nonself molecules, usually large proteins,
which provoke an immune response. In transfusion
reactions, antibodies attach to antigens on the surfaces
of erythrocytes and cause agglutination and hemolysis.
ABO blood group antigens are designated A and B.
People with type A blood have A antigens on their
erythrocytes, whereas those with type B blood have B
antigens. Those with AB blood have both A and B
antigens, and those with type O blood have neither A
nor B antigens. The blood plasma contains preformed
antibodies against the antigens not present on a
person’s erythrocytes.
A second group of blood antigens is the Rh group, the
most important of which is Rh D. People with Rh− blood
do not have this antigen on their erythrocytes, whereas
those who are Rh+ do. About 85 percent of Americans
are Rh+. When a person who is Rh− becomes pregnant
with an Rh+ fetus, their body may begin to produce
anti-Rh antibodies. If the person subsequently
becomes pregnant with a second Rh+ fetus and is not
treated preventively with RhoGAM, the fetus will be at
risk for an antigen-antibody reaction, including
agglutination and hemolysis. This is known as
hemolytic disease of the newborn.
Cross matching to determine blood type is necessary
before transfusing blood, unless the patient is
experiencing hemorrhage that is an immediate threat
to life, in which case type O− blood may be transfused.
18 • Chapter Review
747
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/normallevels)
for a list of normal levels established for many of
the substances found in a sample of blood. Serum,
one of the specimen types included, refers to a
sample of plasma after clotting factors have been
removed. What types of measurements are given
for levels of glucose in the blood?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/doping) to
see doctors discuss the dangers of blood doping in
sports. What are the some potential side effects of
blood doping?
3. Figure 18.13 Are you able to recognize and identify
the various formed elements? You will need to do
this is a systematic manner, scanning along the
image. The standard method is to use a grid, but
this is not possible with this resource. Try
constructing a simple table with each leukocyte
type and then making a mark for each cell type you
identify. Attempt to classify at least 50 and perhaps
as many as 100 different cells. Based on the
percentage of cells that you count, do the numbers
represent a normal blood smear or does something
appear to be abnormal?
4. View these animations (http://openstax.org/l/
coagulation) to explore the intrinsic, extrinsic, and
common pathways that are involved the process of
coagulation. The coagulation cascade restores
hemostasis by activating coagulation factors in the
presence of an injury. How does the endothelium of
the blood vessel walls prevent the blood from
coagulating as it flows through the blood vessels?
Review Questions
5. Which of the following statements about blood is
true?
a.
Blood is about 92 percent water.
b.
Blood is slightly more acidic than water.
c.
Blood is slightly more viscous than water.
d.
Blood is slightly more salty than seawater.
6. Which of the following statements about albumin is
true?
a.
It draws water out of the blood vessels and into
the body’s tissues.
b.
It is the most abundant plasma protein.
c.
It is produced by specialized leukocytes called
plasma cells.
d.
All of the above are true.
7. Which of the following plasma proteins is not
produced by the liver?
a.
fibrinogen
b.
alpha globulin
c.
beta globulin
d.
immunoglobulin
8. Which of the formed elements arise from myeloid
stem cells?
a.
B cells
b.
natural killer cells
c.
platelets
d.
all of the above
9. Which of the following statements about
erythropoietin is true?
a.
It facilitates the proliferation and
differentiation of the erythrocyte lineage.
b.
It is a hormone produced by the thyroid gland.
c.
It is a hemopoietic growth factor that prompts
lymphoid stem cells to leave the bone marrow.
d.
Both a and b are true.
10. Interleukins are associated primarily with which of
the following?
a.
production of various lymphocytes
b.
immune responses
c.
inflammation
d.
all of the above
11. Which of the following statements about mature,
circulating erythrocytes is true?
a.
They have no nucleus.
b.
They are packed with mitochondria.
c.
They survive for an average of 4 days.
d.
All of the above
12. A molecule of hemoglobin ________.
a.
is shaped like a biconcave disk packed almost
entirely with iron
b.
contains four glycoprotein units studded with
oxygen
c.
consists of four globin proteins, each bound
to a molecule of heme
d.
can carry up to 120 molecules of oxygen
748
18 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
13. The production of healthy erythrocytes depends
upon the availability of ________.
a.
copper
b.
zinc
c.
vitamin B12
d.
copper, zinc, and vitamin B12
14. Aging and damaged erythrocytes are removed
from the circulation by ________.
a.
myeoblasts
b.
monocytes
c.
macrophages
d.
mast cells
15. A patient has been suffering for 2 months with a
chronic, watery diarrhea. A blood test is likely to
reveal ________.
a.
a hematocrit below 30 percent
b.
hypoxemia
c.
anemia
d.
polycythemia
16. The process by which leukocytes squeeze through
adjacent cells in a blood vessel wall is called
________.
a.
leukocytosis
b.
positive chemotaxis
c.
emigration
d.
cytoplasmic extending
17. Which of the following describes a neutrophil?
a.
abundant, agranular, especially effective
against cancer cells
b.
abundant, granular, especially effective
against bacteria
c.
rare, agranular, releases antimicrobial
defensins
d.
rare, granular, contains multiple granules
packed with histamine
18. T and B lymphocytes ________.
a.
are polymorphonuclear
b.
are involved with specific immune function
c.
proliferate excessively in leukopenia
d.
are most active against parasitic worms
19. A patient has been experiencing severe, persistent
allergy symptoms that are reduced when she
takes an antihistamine. Before the treatment, this
patient was likely to have had increased activity of
which leukocyte?
a.
basophils
b.
neutrophils
c.
monocytes
d.
natural killer cells
20. Thrombocytes are more accurately called
________.
a.
clotting factors
b.
megakaryoblasts
c.
megakaryocytes
d.
platelets
21. The first step in hemostasis is ________.
a.
vascular spasm
b.
conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin
c.
activation of the intrinsic pathway
d.
activation of the common pathway
22. Prothrombin is converted to thrombin during the
________.
a.
intrinsic pathway
b.
extrinsic pathway
c.
common pathway
d.
formation of the platelet plug
23. Hemophilia is characterized by ________.
a.
inadequate production of heparin
b.
inadequate production of clotting factors
c.
excessive production of fibrinogen
d.
excessive production of platelets
24. The process in which antibodies attach to
antigens, causing the formation of masses of
linked cells, is called ________.
a.
sensitization
b.
coagulation
c.
agglutination
d.
hemolysis
25. People with ABO blood type O ________.
a.
have both antigens A and B on their
erythrocytes
b.
lack both antigens A and B on their
erythrocytes
c.
have neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies
circulating in their blood plasma
d.
are considered universal recipients
26. Hemolytic disease of the newborn is a risk during
a subsequent pregnancy in which ________.
a.
a type AB person is carrying a type O fetus
b.
a type O person is carrying a type AB fetus
c.
an Rh+ person is carrying an Rh− fetus
d.
an Rh− person is carrying a second Rh+ fetus
18 • Review Questions
749
Critical Thinking Questions
27. A patient’s hematocrit is 42 percent.
Approximately what percentage of the patient’s
blood is plasma?
28. Why would it be incorrect to refer to the formed
elements as cells?
29. True or false: The buffy coat is the portion of a
blood sample that is made up of its proteins.
30. Myelofibrosis is a disorder in which inflammation
and scar tissue formation in the bone marrow
impair hemopoiesis. One sign is an enlarged
spleen. Why?
31. Would you expect a patient with a form of cancer
called acute myelogenous leukemia to experience
impaired production of erythrocytes, or impaired
production of lymphocytes? Explain your choice.
32. A young person has been experiencing unusually
heavy menstrual bleeding for several years. They
follow a strict vegan diet (no animal foods). They
are is at risk for what disorder, and why?
33. A patient has thalassemia, a genetic disorder
characterized by abnormal synthesis of globin
proteins and excessive destruction of
erythrocytes. This patient is jaundiced and is
found to have an excessive level of bilirubin in
their blood. Explain the connection.
34. One of the more common adverse effects of
cancer chemotherapy is the destruction of
leukocytes. Before his next scheduled
chemotherapy treatment, a patient undergoes a
blood test called an absolute neutrophil count
(ANC), which reveals that his neutrophil count is
1900 cells per microliter. Would his healthcare
team be likely to proceed with his chemotherapy
treatment? Why?
35. A patient was admitted to the burn unit the
previous evening suffering from a severe burn
involving their left upper extremity and shoulder. A
blood test reveals that they are experiencing
leukocytosis. Why is this an expected finding?
36. A lab technician collects a blood sample in a glass
tube. After about an hour, she harvests serum to
continue her blood analysis. Explain what has
happened during the hour that the sample was in
the glass tube.
37. Explain why administration of a thrombolytic
agent is a first intervention for someone who has
suffered a thrombotic stroke.
38. Following a motor vehicle accident, a patient is
rushed to the emergency department with
multiple traumatic injuries, causing severe
bleeding. The patient’s condition is critical, and
there is no time for determining their blood type.
What type of blood is transfused, and why?
39. In preparation for a scheduled surgery, a patient
visits the hospital lab for a blood draw. The
technician collects a blood sample and performs a
test to determine its type. She places a sample of
the patient’s blood in two wells. To the first well
she adds anti-A antibody. To the second she adds
anti-B antibody. Both samples visibly agglutinate.
Has the technician made an error, or is this a
normal response? If normal, what blood type does
this indicate?
750
18 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 19
The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify and describe the interior and exterior parts of the human heart
•
Describe the path of blood through the cardiac circuits
•
Describe the size, shape, and location of the heart
•
Compare cardiac muscle to skeletal and smooth muscle
•
Explain the cardiac conduction system
•
Describe the process and purpose of an electrocardiogram
•
Explain the cardiac cycle
•
Calculate cardiac output
•
Describe the effects of exercise on cardiac output and heart rate
•
Name the centers of the brain that control heart rate and describe their function
•
Identify other factors affecting heart rate
•
Describe fetal heart development
In this chapter, you will explore the remarkable pump that propels the blood into the vessels.
There is no single better word to describe the function of the heart other than “pump,” since its contraction develops
the pressure that ejects blood into the major vessels: the aorta and pulmonary trunk. From these vessels, the blood
is distributed to the remainder of the body. Although the connotation of the term “pump” suggests a mechanical
device made of steel and plastic, the anatomical structure is a living, sophisticated muscle. As you read this chapter,
try to keep these twin concepts in mind: pump and muscle.
Although the term “heart” is an English word, cardiac (heart-related) terminology can be traced back to the Latin
term, “kardia.” Cardiology is the study of the heart, and cardiologists are the physicians who deal primarily with the
heart.
Figure 19.1
Human Heart This artist’s conception of the human heart suggests a powerful engine—not inappropriate for a muscular
pump that keeps the body continually supplied with blood. (credit: Patrick J. Lynch)
19.1 Heart Anatomy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the location and position of the heart within the body cavity
•
Describe the internal and external anatomy of the heart
•
Identify the tissue layers of the heart
•
Relate the structure of the heart to its function as a pump
•
Compare systemic circulation to pulmonary circulation
•
Identify the veins and arteries of the coronary circulation system
•
Trace the pathway of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood thorough the chambers of the heart
The vital importance of the heart is obvious. If one assumes an average rate of contraction of 75 contractions per
minute, a human heart would contract approximately 108,000 times in one day, more than 39 million times in one
year, and nearly 3 billion times during a 75-year lifespan. Each of the major pumping chambers of the heart ejects
approximately 70 mL blood per contraction in a resting adult. This would be equal to 5.25 liters of fluid per minute
and approximately 14,000 liters per day. Over one year, that would equal 10,000,000 liters or 2.6 million gallons of
blood sent through roughly 60,000 miles of vessels. In order to understand how that happens, it is necessary to
understand the anatomy and physiology of the heart.
Location of the Heart
The human heart is located within the thoracic cavity, medially between the lungs in the space known as the
mediastinum. Figure 19.2 shows the position of the heart within the thoracic cavity. Within the mediastinum, the
heart is separated from the other mediastinal structures by a tough membrane known as the pericardium, or
pericardial sac, and sits in its own space called the pericardial cavity. The dorsal surface of the heart lies near the
bodies of the vertebrae, and its anterior surface sits deep to the sternum and costal cartilages. The great veins, the
superior and inferior venae cavae, and the great arteries, the aorta and pulmonary trunk, are attached to the
superior surface of the heart, called the base. The base of the heart is located at the level of the third costal
cartilage, as seen in Figure 19.2. The inferior tip of the heart, the apex, lies just to the left of the sternum between
the junction of the fourth and fifth ribs near their articulation with the costal cartilages. The right side of the heart is
deflected anteriorly, and the left side is deflected posteriorly. It is important to remember the position and
orientation of the heart when placing a stethoscope on the chest of a patient and listening for heart sounds, and also
when looking at images taken from a midsagittal perspective. The slight deviation of the apex to the left is reflected
in a depression in the medial surface of the inferior lobe of the left lung, called the cardiac notch.
752
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.2
Position of the Heart in the Thorax
The heart is located within the thoracic cavity, medially between the lungs in the
mediastinum. It is about the size of a fist, is broad at the top, and tapers toward the base.
Everyday Connection
CPR
The position of the heart in the torso between the vertebrae and sternum (see Figure 19.2 for the position of the
heart within the thorax) allows for individuals to apply an emergency technique known as cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) if the heart of a patient should stop. By applying pressure with the flat portion of one hand on
the sternum in the area between the line at T4 and T9 (Figure 19.3), it is possible to manually compress the
blood within the heart enough to push some of the blood within it into the pulmonary and systemic circuits. This
is particularly critical for the brain, as irreversible damage and death of neurons occur within minutes of loss of
blood flow. Current standards call for compression of the chest at least 5 cm deep and at a rate of 100
compressions per minute, a rate equal to the beat in “Staying Alive,” recorded in 1977 by the Bee Gees. If you
are unfamiliar with this song, a version is available on www.youtube.com. At this stage, the emphasis is on
performing high-quality chest compressions, rather than providing artificial respiration. CPR is generally
performed until the patient regains spontaneous contraction or is declared dead by an experienced healthcare
professional.
When performed by untrained or overzealous individuals, CPR can result in broken ribs or a broken sternum, and
can inflict additional severe damage on the patient. It is also possible, if the hands are placed too low on the
sternum, to manually drive the xiphoid process into the liver, a consequence that may prove fatal for the patient.
Proper training is essential. This proven life-sustaining technique is so valuable that virtually all medical
personnel as well as concerned members of the public should be certified and routinely recertified in its
application. CPR courses are offered at a variety of locations, including colleges, hospitals, the American Red
Cross, and some commercial companies. They normally include practice of the compression technique on a
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
753
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit the American Heart Association website (http://openstax.org/l/AHA) to help locate a course near your home in
the United States. There are also many other national and regional heart associations that offer the same service,
depending upon the location.
Shape and Size of the Heart
The shape of the heart is similar to a pinecone, rather broad at the superior surface and tapering to the apex (see
Figure 19.2). A typical heart is approximately the size of your fist: 12 cm (5 in) in length, 8 cm (3.5 in) wide, and 6 cm
(2.5 in) in thickness. Given the size difference between most members of the sexes, the weight of a female heart is
approximately 250–300 grams (9 to 11 ounces), and the weight of a male heart is approximately 300–350 grams
(11 to 12 ounces). The heart of a well-trained athlete, especially one specializing in aerobic sports, can be
considerably larger than this. Cardiac muscle responds to exercise in a manner similar to that of skeletal muscle.
That is, exercise results in the addition of protein myofilaments that increase the size of the individual cells without
increasing their numbers, a concept called hypertrophy. Hearts of athletes can pump blood more effectively at lower
rates than those of nonathletes. Enlarged hearts are not always a result of exercise; they can result from
pathologies, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The cause of an abnormally enlarged heart muscle is unknown,
but the condition is often undiagnosed and can cause sudden death in apparently otherwise healthy young people.
Chambers and Circulation through the Heart
The human heart consists of four chambers: The left side and the right side each have one atrium and one
ventricle. Each of the upper chambers, the right atrium (plural = atria) and the left atrium, acts as a receiving
chamber and contracts to push blood into the lower chambers, the right ventricle and the left ventricle. The
ventricles serve as the primary pumping chambers of the heart, propelling blood to the lungs or to the rest of the
body.
There are two distinct but linked circuits in the human circulation called the pulmonary and systemic circuits.
Although both circuits transport blood and everything it carries, we can initially view the circuits from the point of
view of gases. The pulmonary circuit transports blood to and from the lungs, where it picks up oxygen and delivers
carbon dioxide for exhalation. The systemic circuit transports oxygenated blood to virtually all of the tissues of the
body and returns relatively deoxygenated blood and carbon dioxide to the heart to be sent back to the pulmonary
circulation.
mannequin.
FIGURE 19.3
CPR Technique
If the heart should stop, CPR can maintain the flow of blood until the heart resumes beating. By
applying pressure to the sternum, the blood within the heart will be squeezed out of the heart and into the circulation. Proper
positioning of the hands on the sternum to perform CPR would be between the lines at T4 and T9.
754
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
The right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood into the pulmonary trunk, which leads toward the lungs and
bifurcates into the left and right pulmonary arteries. These vessels in turn branch many times before reaching the
pulmonary capillaries, where gas exchange occurs: Carbon dioxide exits the blood and oxygen enters. The
pulmonary trunk arteries and their branches are the only arteries in the post-natal body that carry relatively
deoxygenated blood. Highly oxygenated blood returning from the pulmonary capillaries in the lungs passes through
a series of vessels that join together to form the pulmonary veins—the only post-natal veins in the body that carry
highly oxygenated blood. The pulmonary veins conduct blood into the left atrium, which pumps the blood into the
left ventricle, which in turn pumps oxygenated blood into the aorta and on to the many branches of the systemic
circuit. Eventually, these vessels will lead to the systemic capillaries, where exchange with the tissue fluid and cells
of the body occurs. In this case, oxygen and nutrients exit the systemic capillaries to be used by the cells in their
metabolic processes, and carbon dioxide and waste products will enter the blood.
The blood exiting the systemic capillaries is lower in oxygen concentration than when it entered. The capillaries will
ultimately unite to form venules, joining to form ever-larger veins, eventually flowing into the two major systemic
veins, the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava, which return blood to the right atrium. The blood in the
superior and inferior venae cavae flows into the right atrium, which pumps blood into the right ventricle. This
process of blood circulation continues as long as the individual remains alive. Understanding the flow of blood
through the pulmonary and systemic circuits is critical to all health professions (Figure 19.4).
FIGURE 19.4
Dual System of the Human Blood Circulation
Blood flows from the right atrium to the right ventricle, where it is
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
755
pumped into the pulmonary circuit. The blood in the pulmonary artery branches is low in oxygen but relatively high in carbon dioxide. Gas
exchange occurs in the pulmonary capillaries (oxygen into the blood, carbon dioxide out), and blood high in oxygen and low in carbon
dioxide is returned to the left atrium. From here, blood enters the left ventricle, which pumps it into the systemic circuit. Following
exchange in the systemic capillaries (oxygen and nutrients out of the capillaries and carbon dioxide and wastes in), blood returns to the
right atrium and the cycle is repeated.
Membranes, Surface Features, and Layers
Our exploration of more in-depth heart structures begins by examining the membrane that surrounds the heart, the
prominent surface features of the heart, and the layers that form the wall of the heart. Each of these components
plays its own unique role in terms of function.
Membranes
The membrane that directly surrounds the heart and defines the pericardial cavity is called the pericardium or
pericardial sac. It also surrounds the “roots” of the major vessels, or the areas of closest proximity to the heart. The
pericardium, which literally translates as “around the heart,” consists of two distinct sublayers: the sturdy outer
fibrous pericardium and the inner serous pericardium. The fibrous pericardium is made of tough, dense connective
tissue that protects the heart and maintains its position in the thorax. The more delicate serous pericardium
consists of two layers: the parietal pericardium, which is fused to the fibrous pericardium, and an inner visceral
pericardium, or epicardium, which is fused to the heart and is part of the heart wall. The pericardial cavity, filled
with lubricating serous fluid, lies between the epicardium and the pericardium.
In most organs within the body, visceral serous membranes such as the epicardium are microscopic. However, in
the case of the heart, it is not a microscopic layer but rather a macroscopic layer, consisting of a simple squamous
epithelium called a mesothelium, reinforced with loose, irregular, or areolar connective tissue that attaches to the
pericardium. This mesothelium secretes the lubricating serous fluid that fills the pericardial cavity and reduces
friction as the heart contracts. Figure 19.5 illustrates the pericardial membrane and the layers of the heart.
FIGURE 19.5
Pericardial Membranes and Layers of the Heart Wall
The pericardial membrane that surrounds the heart consists of
three layers and the pericardial cavity. The heart wall also consists of three layers. The pericardial membrane and the heart wall share the
epicardium.
Disorders of the...
Heart: Cardiac Tamponade
If excess fluid builds within the pericardial space, it can lead to a condition called cardiac tamponade, or
pericardial tamponade. With each contraction of the heart, more fluid—in most instances, blood—accumulates
756
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Surface Features of the Heart
Inside the pericardium, the surface features of the heart are visible, including the four chambers. There is a
superficial leaf-like extension of the atria near the superior surface of the heart, one on each side, called an
auricle—a name that means “ear like”—because its shape resembles the external ear of a human (Figure 19.6).
Auricles are relatively thin-walled structures that can fill with blood and empty into the atria or upper chambers of
the heart. You may also hear them referred to as atrial appendages. Also prominent is a series of fat-filled grooves,
each of which is known as a sulcus (plural = sulci), along the superior surfaces of the heart. Major coronary blood
vessels are located in these sulci. The deep coronary sulcus is located between the atria and ventricles. Located
between the left and right ventricles are two additional sulci that are not as deep as the coronary sulcus. The
anterior interventricular sulcus is visible on the anterior surface of the heart, whereas the posterior
interventricular sulcus is visible on the posterior surface of the heart. Figure 19.6 illustrates anterior and posterior
views of the surface of the heart.
within the pericardial cavity. In order to fill with blood for the next contraction, the heart must relax. However,
the excess fluid in the pericardial cavity puts pressure on the heart and prevents full relaxation, so the chambers
within the heart contain slightly less blood as they begin each heart cycle. Over time, less and less blood is
ejected from the heart. If the fluid builds up slowly, as in hypothyroidism, the pericardial cavity may be able to
expand gradually to accommodate this extra volume. Some cases of fluid in excess of one liter within the
pericardial cavity have been reported. Rapid accumulation of as little as 100 mL of fluid following trauma may
trigger cardiac tamponade. Other common causes include myocardial rupture, pericarditis, cancer, or even
cardiac surgery. Removal of this excess fluid requires insertion of drainage tubes into the pericardial cavity.
Premature removal of these drainage tubes, for example, following cardiac surgery, or clot formation within
these tubes are causes of this condition. Untreated, cardiac tamponade can lead to death.
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
757
FIGURE 19.6
External Anatomy of the Heart
Inside the pericardium, the surface features of the heart are visible.
Layers
The wall of the heart is composed of three layers of unequal thickness. From superficial to deep, these are the
epicardium, the myocardium, and the endocardium (see Figure 19.5). The outermost layer of the wall of the heart is
also the innermost layer of the pericardium, the epicardium, or the visceral pericardium discussed earlier.
The middle and thickest layer is the myocardium, made largely of cardiac muscle cells. It is built upon a framework
of collagenous fibers, plus the blood vessels that supply the myocardium and the nerve fibers that help regulate the
heart. It is the contraction of the myocardium that pumps blood through the heart and into the major arteries. The
muscle pattern is elegant and complex, as the muscle cells swirl and spiral around the chambers of the heart. They
form a figure 8 pattern around the atria and around the bases of the great vessels. Deeper ventricular muscles also
form a figure 8 around the two ventricles and proceed toward the apex. More superficial layers of ventricular muscle
wrap around both ventricles. This complex swirling pattern allows the heart to pump blood more effectively than a
simple linear pattern would. Figure 19.7 illustrates the arrangement of muscle cells.
758
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.7
Heart Musculature
The swirling pattern of cardiac muscle tissue contributes significantly to the heart’s ability to pump
blood effectively.
Although the ventricles on the right and left sides pump the same amount of blood per contraction, the muscle of
the left ventricle is much thicker and better developed than that of the right ventricle. In order to overcome the high
resistance required to pump blood into the long systemic circuit, the left ventricle must generate a great amount of
pressure. The right ventricle does not need to generate as much pressure, since the pulmonary circuit is shorter and
provides less resistance. Figure 19.8 illustrates the differences in muscular thickness needed for each of the
ventricles.
FIGURE 19.8
Differences in Ventricular Muscle Thickness
The myocardium in the left ventricle is significantly thicker than that of the
right ventricle. Both ventricles pump the same amount of blood, but the left ventricle must generate a much greater pressure to overcome
greater resistance in the systemic circuit. The ventricles are shown in both relaxed and contracting states. Note the differences in the
relative size of the lumens, the region inside each ventricle where the blood is contained.
The innermost layer of the heart wall, the endocardium, is joined to the myocardium with a thin layer of connective
tissue. The endocardium lines the chambers where the blood circulates and covers the heart valves. It is made of
simple squamous epithelium called endothelium, which is continuous with the endothelial lining of the blood
vessels (see Figure 19.5).
Once regarded as a simple lining layer, recent evidence indicates that the endothelium of the endocardium and the
coronary capillaries may play active roles in regulating the contraction of the muscle within the myocardium. The
endothelium may also regulate the growth patterns of the cardiac muscle cells throughout life, and the endothelins
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
759
it secretes create an environment in the surrounding tissue fluids that regulates ionic concentrations and states of
contractility. Endothelins are potent vasoconstrictors and, in a normal individual, establish a homeostatic balance
with other vasoconstrictors and vasodilators.
Internal Structure of the Heart
Recall that the heart’s contraction cycle follows a dual pattern of circulation—the pulmonary and systemic
circuits—because of the pairs of chambers that pump blood into the circulation. In order to develop a more precise
understanding of cardiac function, it is first necessary to explore the internal anatomical structures in more detail.
Septa of the Heart
The word septum is derived from the Latin for “something that encloses;” in this case, a septum (plural = septa)
refers to a wall or partition that divides the heart into chambers. The septa are physical extensions of the
myocardium lined with endocardium. Located between the two atria is the interatrial septum. Normally in an adult
heart, the interatrial septum bears an oval-shaped depression known as the fossa ovalis, a remnant of an opening in
the fetal heart known as the foramen ovale. The foramen ovale allowed blood in the fetal heart to pass directly from
the right atrium to the left atrium, allowing some blood to bypass the pulmonary circuit. Within seconds after birth, a
flap of tissue known as the septum primum that previously acted as a valve closes the foramen ovale and
establishes the typical cardiac circulation pattern.
Between the two ventricles is a second septum known as the interventricular septum. Unlike the interatrial
septum, the interventricular septum is normally intact after its formation during fetal development. It is
substantially thicker than the interatrial septum, since the ventricles generate far greater pressure when they
contract.
The septum between the atria and ventricles is known as the atrioventricular septum. It is marked by the presence
of four openings that allow blood to move from the atria into the ventricles and from the ventricles into the
pulmonary trunk and aorta. Located in each of these openings between the atria and ventricles is a valve, a
specialized structure that ensures one-way flow of blood. The valves between the atria and ventricles are known
generically as atrioventricular valves. The valves at the openings that lead to the pulmonary trunk and aorta are
known generically as semilunar valves. The interventricular septum is visible in Figure 19.9. In this figure, the
atrioventricular septum has been removed to better show the bicuspid and tricuspid valves; the interatrial septum is
not visible, since its location is covered by the aorta and pulmonary trunk. Since these openings and valves
structurally weaken the atrioventricular septum, the remaining tissue is heavily reinforced with dense connective
tissue called the cardiac skeleton, or skeleton of the heart. It includes four rings that surround the openings
between the atria and ventricles, and the openings to the pulmonary trunk and aorta, and serve as the point of
attachment for the heart valves. The cardiac skeleton also provides an important boundary in the heart electrical
conduction system.
760
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.9
Internal Structures of the Heart
This anterior view of the heart shows the four chambers, the major vessels and their
early branches, as well as the valves. The presence of the pulmonary trunk and aorta covers the interatrial septum, and the atrioventricular
septum is cut away to show the atrioventricular valves.
Disorders of the...
Heart: Heart Defects
One very common form of interatrial septum pathology is patent foramen ovale, which occurs when the septum
primum does not close at birth, and the fossa ovalis is unable to fuse. The word patent is from the Latin root
patens for “open.” It may be benign or asymptomatic, perhaps never being diagnosed, or in extreme cases, it
may require surgical repair to close the opening permanently. As much as 20–25 percent of the general
population may have a patent foramen ovale, but fortunately, most have the benign, asymptomatic version.
Patent foramen ovale is normally detected by auscultation of a heart murmur (an abnormal heart sound) and
confirmed by imaging with an echocardiogram. Despite its prevalence in the general population, the causes of
patent ovale are unknown, and there are no known risk factors. In nonlife-threatening cases, it is better to
monitor the condition than to risk heart surgery to repair and seal the opening.
Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital abnormal narrowing of the aorta that is normally located at the insertion
of the ligamentum arteriosum, the remnant of the fetal shunt called the ductus arteriosus. If severe, this
condition drastically restricts blood flow through the primary systemic artery, which is life threatening. In some
individuals, the condition may be fairly benign and not detected until later in life. Detectable symptoms in an
infant include difficulty breathing, poor appetite, trouble feeding, or failure to thrive. In older individuals,
symptoms include dizziness, fainting, shortness of breath, chest pain, fatigue, headache, and nosebleeds.
Treatment involves surgery to resect (remove) the affected region or angioplasty to open the abnormally narrow
passageway. Studies have shown that the earlier the surgery is performed, the better the chance of survival.
A patent ductus arteriosus is a congenital condition in which the ductus arteriosus fails to close. The condition
may range from severe to benign. Failure of the ductus arteriosus to close results in blood flowing from the
higher pressure aorta into the lower pressure pulmonary trunk. This additional fluid moving toward the lungs
increases pulmonary pressure and makes respiration difficult. Symptoms include shortness of breath (dyspnea),
tachycardia, enlarged heart, a widened pulse pressure, and poor weight gain in infants. Treatments include
surgical closure (ligation), manual closure using platinum coils or specialized mesh inserted via the femoral
artery or vein, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to block the synthesis of prostaglandin E2, which
maintains the vessel in an open position. If untreated, the condition can result in congestive heart failure.
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
761
Right Atrium
The right atrium serves as the receiving chamber for blood returning to the heart from the systemic circulation. The
Septal defects are not uncommon in individuals and may be congenital or caused by various disease processes.
Tetralogy of Fallot is a congenital condition that may also occur from exposure to unknown environmental
factors; it occurs when there is an opening in the interventricular septum caused by blockage of the pulmonary
trunk, normally at the pulmonary semilunar valve. This allows blood that is relatively low in oxygen from the right
ventricle to flow into the left ventricle and mix with the blood that is relatively high in oxygen. Symptoms include
a distinct heart murmur, low blood oxygen percent saturation, dyspnea or difficulty in breathing, polycythemia,
broadening (clubbing) of the fingers and toes, and in children, difficulty in feeding or failure to grow and develop.
It is the most common cause of cyanosis following birth. The term “tetralogy” is derived from the four
components of the condition, although only three may be present in an individual patient: pulmonary
infundibular stenosis (rigidity of the pulmonary valve), overriding aorta (the aorta is shifted above both
ventricles), ventricular septal defect (opening), and right ventricular hypertrophy (enlargement of the right
ventricle). Other heart defects may also accompany this condition, which is typically confirmed by
echocardiography imaging. Tetralogy of Fallot occurs in approximately 400 out of one million live births. Normal
treatment involves extensive surgical repair, including the use of stents to redirect blood flow and replacement
of valves and patches to repair the septal defect, but the condition has a relatively high mortality. Survival rates
are currently 75 percent during the first year of life; 60 percent by 4 years of age; 30 percent by 10 years; and 5
percent by 40 years.
In the case of severe septal defects, including both tetralogy of Fallot and patent foramen ovale, failure of the
heart to develop properly can lead to a condition commonly known as a “blue baby.” Regardless of normal skin
pigmentation, individuals with this condition have an insufficient supply of oxygenated blood, which leads to
cyanosis, a blue or purple coloration of the skin, especially when active.
Septal defects are commonly first detected through auscultation, listening to the chest using a stethoscope. In
this case, instead of hearing normal heart sounds attributed to the flow of blood and closing of heart valves,
unusual heart sounds may be detected. This is often followed by medical imaging to confirm or rule out a
diagnosis. In many cases, treatment may not be needed. Some common congenital heart defects are illustrated
in Figure 19.10.
FIGURE 19.10
Congenital Heart Defects
(a) A patent foramen ovale defect is an abnormal opening in the interatrial septum, or
more commonly, a failure of the foramen ovale to close. (b) Coarctation of the aorta is an abnormal narrowing of the aorta. (c) A patent
ductus arteriosus is the failure of the ductus arteriosus to close. (d) Tetralogy of Fallot includes an abnormal opening in the
interventricular septum.
762
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
two major systemic veins, the superior and inferior venae cavae, and the large coronary vein called the coronary
sinus that drains the heart myocardium empty into the right atrium. The superior vena cava drains blood from
regions superior to the diaphragm: the head, neck, upper limbs, and the thoracic region. It empties into the superior
and posterior portions of the right atrium. The inferior vena cava drains blood from areas inferior to the diaphragm:
the lower limbs and abdominopelvic region of the body. It, too, empties into the posterior portion of the atria, but
inferior to the opening of the superior vena cava. Immediately superior and slightly medial to the opening of the
inferior vena cava on the posterior surface of the atrium is the opening of the coronary sinus. This thin-walled vessel
drains most of the coronary veins that return systemic blood from the heart. The majority of the internal heart
structures discussed in this and subsequent sections are illustrated in Figure 19.9.
While the bulk of the internal surface of the right atrium is smooth, the depression of the fossa ovalis is medial, and
the anterior surface demonstrates prominent ridges of muscle called the pectinate muscles. The right auricle also
has pectinate muscles. The left atrium does not have pectinate muscles except in the auricle.
The atria receive venous blood on a nearly continuous basis, preventing venous flow from stopping while the
ventricles are contracting. While most ventricular filling occurs while the atria are relaxed, they do demonstrate a
contractile phase and actively pump blood into the ventricles just prior to ventricular contraction. The opening
between the atrium and ventricle is guarded by the tricuspid valve.
Right Ventricle
The right ventricle receives blood from the right atrium through the tricuspid valve. Each flap of the valve is attached
to strong strands of connective tissue, the chordae tendineae, literally “tendinous cords,” or sometimes more
poetically referred to as “heart strings.” There are several chordae tendineae associated with each of the flaps. They
are composed of approximately 80 percent collagenous fibers with the remainder consisting of elastic fibers and
endothelium. They connect each of the flaps to a papillary muscle that extends from the inferior ventricular
surface. There are three papillary muscles in the right ventricle, called the anterior, posterior, and septal muscles,
which correspond to the three sections of the valves.
When the myocardium of the ventricle contracts, pressure within the ventricular chamber rises. Blood, like any fluid,
flows from higher pressure to lower pressure areas, in this case, toward the pulmonary trunk and the atrium. To
prevent any potential backflow, the papillary muscles also contract, generating tension on the chordae tendineae.
This prevents the flaps of the valves from being forced into the atria and regurgitation of the blood back into the atria
during ventricular contraction. Figure 19.11 shows papillary muscles and chordae tendineae attached to the
tricuspid valve.
FIGURE 19.11
Chordae Tendineae and Papillary Muscles
In this frontal section, you can see papillary muscles attached to the
tricuspid valve on the right as well as the mitral valve on the left via chordae tendineae. (credit: modification of work by “PV KS”/flickr.com)
The walls of the ventricle are lined with trabeculae carneae, ridges of cardiac muscle covered by endocardium. In
addition to these muscular ridges, a band of cardiac muscle, also covered by endocardium, known as the moderator
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
763
band (see Figure 19.9) reinforces the thin walls of the right ventricle and plays a crucial role in cardiac conduction.
It arises from the inferior portion of the interventricular septum and crosses the interior space of the right ventricle
to connect with the inferior papillary muscle.
When the right ventricle contracts, it ejects blood into the pulmonary trunk, which branches into the left and right
pulmonary arteries that carry it to each lung. The superior surface of the right ventricle begins to taper as it
approaches the pulmonary trunk. At the base of the pulmonary trunk is the pulmonary semilunar valve that prevents
backflow from the pulmonary trunk.
Left Atrium
After exchange of gases in the pulmonary capillaries, blood returns to the left atrium high in oxygen via one of the
four pulmonary veins. While the left atrium does not contain pectinate muscles, it does have an auricle that includes
these pectinate ridges. Blood flows nearly continuously from the pulmonary veins back into the atrium, which acts
as the receiving chamber, and from here through an opening into the left ventricle. Most blood flows passively into
the heart while both the atria and ventricles are relaxed, but toward the end of the ventricular relaxation period, the
left atrium will contract, pumping blood into the ventricle. This atrial contraction accounts for approximately 20
percent of ventricular filling. The opening between the left atrium and ventricle is guarded by the mitral valve.
Left Ventricle
Recall that, although both sides of the heart will pump the same amount of blood, the muscular layer is much
thicker in the left ventricle compared to the right (see Figure 19.8). Like the right ventricle, the left also has
trabeculae carneae, but there is no moderator band. The mitral valve is connected to papillary muscles via chordae
tendineae. There are two papillary muscles on the left—the anterior and posterior—as opposed to three on the right.
The left ventricle is the major pumping chamber for the systemic circuit; it ejects blood into the aorta through the
aortic semilunar valve.
Heart Valve Structure and Function
A transverse section through the heart slightly above the level of the atrioventricular septum reveals all four heart
valves along the same plane (Figure 19.12). The valves ensure unidirectional blood flow through the heart. Between
the right atrium and the right ventricle is the right atrioventricular valve, or tricuspid valve. It typically consists of
three flaps, or leaflets, made of endocardium reinforced with additional connective tissue. The flaps are connected
by chordae tendineae to the papillary muscles, which control the opening and closing of the valves.
FIGURE 19.12
Heart Valves
With the atria and major vessels removed, all four valves are clearly visible, although it is difficult to
distinguish the three separate cusps of the tricuspid valve.
764
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Emerging from the right ventricle at the base of the pulmonary trunk is the pulmonary semilunar valve, or the
pulmonary valve; it is also known as the pulmonic valve or the right semilunar valve. The pulmonary valve is
comprised of three small flaps of endothelium reinforced with connective tissue. When the ventricle relaxes, the
pressure differential causes blood to flow back into the ventricle from the pulmonary trunk. This flow of blood fills
the pocket-like flaps of the pulmonary valve, causing the valve to close and producing an audible sound. Unlike the
atrioventricular valves, there are no papillary muscles or chordae tendineae associated with the pulmonary valve.
Located at the opening between the left atrium and left ventricle is the mitral valve, also called the bicuspid valve
or the left atrioventricular valve. Structurally, this valve consists of two cusps, compared to the three cusps of the
tricuspid valve. In a clinical setting, the valve is referred to as the mitral valve, rather than the bicuspid valve. The
two cusps of the mitral valve are attached by chordae tendineae to two papillary muscles that project from the wall
of the ventricle.
At the base of the aorta is the aortic semilunar valve, or the aortic valve, which prevents backflow from the aorta. It
normally is composed of three flaps. When the ventricle relaxes and blood attempts to flow back into the ventricle
from the aorta, blood will fill the cusps of the valve, causing it to close and producing an audible sound.
In Figure 19.13a, the two atrioventricular valves are open and the two semilunar valves are closed. This occurs
when both atria and ventricles are relaxed and when the atria contract to pump blood into the ventricles. Figure
19.13b shows a frontal view. Although only the left side of the heart is illustrated, the process is virtually identical
on the right.
FIGURE 19.13
Blood Flow from the Left Atrium to the Left Ventricle
(a) A transverse section through the heart illustrates the four
heart valves. The two atrioventricular valves are open; the two semilunar valves are closed. The atria and vessels have been removed. (b) A
frontal section through the heart illustrates blood flow through the mitral valve. When the mitral valve is open, it allows blood to move from
the left atrium to the left ventricle. The aortic semilunar valve is closed to prevent backflow of blood from the aorta to the left ventricle.
Figure 19.14a shows the atrioventricular valves closed while the two semilunar valves are open. This occurs when
the ventricles contract to eject blood into the pulmonary trunk and aorta. Closure of the two atrioventricular valves
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
765
prevents blood from being forced back into the atria. This stage can be seen from a frontal view in Figure 19.14b.
FIGURE 19.14
Blood Flow from the Left Ventricle into the Great Vessels
(a) A transverse section through the heart illustrates the
four heart valves during ventricular contraction. The two atrioventricular valves are closed, but the two semilunar valves are open. The atria
and vessels have been removed. (b) A frontal view shows the closed mitral (bicuspid) valve that prevents backflow of blood into the left
atrium. The aortic semilunar valve is open to allow blood to be ejected into the aorta.
When the ventricles begin to contract, pressure within the ventricles rises and blood flows toward the area of lowest
pressure, which is initially in the atria. This backflow causes the cusps of the tricuspid and mitral (bicuspid) valves to
close. These valves are tied down to the papillary muscles by chordae tendineae. During the relaxation phase of the
cardiac cycle, the papillary muscles are also relaxed and the tension on the chordae tendineae is slight (see Figure
19.13b). However, as the myocardium of the ventricle contracts, so do the papillary muscles. This creates tension
on the chordae tendineae (see Figure 19.14b), helping to hold the cusps of the atrioventricular valves in place and
preventing them from being blown back into the atria.
The aortic and pulmonary semilunar valves lack the chordae tendineae and papillary muscles associated with the
atrioventricular valves. Instead, they consist of pocket-like folds of endocardium reinforced with additional
connective tissue. When the ventricles relax and the change in pressure forces the blood toward the ventricles, the
blood presses against these cusps and seals the openings.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/heartvalve) to observe an echocardiogram of actual heart valves opening and
closing. Although much of the heart has been “removed” from this gif loop so the chordae tendineae are not visible,
why is their presence more critical for the atrioventricular valves (tricuspid and mitral) than the semilunar (aortic
and pulmonary) valves?
766
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/heartsounds) for a free download, including excellent animations and audio of
heart sounds.
CAREER CONNECTION
Cardiologist
Cardiologists are medical doctors that specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the heart. After
completing 4 years of medical school, cardiologists complete a three-year residency in internal medicine followed
by an additional three or more years in cardiology. Following this 10-year period of medical training and clinical
experience, they qualify for a rigorous two-day examination administered by the Board of Internal Medicine that
tests their academic training and clinical abilities, including diagnostics and treatment. After successful completion
Disorders of the...
Heart Valves
When heart valves do not function properly, they are often described as incompetent and result in valvular heart
disease, which can range from benign to lethal. Some of these conditions are congenital, that is, the individual
was born with the defect, whereas others may be attributed to disease processes or trauma. Some malfunctions
are treated with medications, others require surgery, and still others may be mild enough that the condition is
merely monitored since treatment might trigger more serious consequences.
Valvular disorders are often caused by carditis, or inflammation of the heart. One common trigger for this
inflammation is rheumatic fever, or scarlet fever, an autoimmune response to the presence of a bacterium,
Streptococcus pyogenes, normally a disease of childhood.
While any of the heart valves may be involved in valve disorders, mitral regurgitation is the most common,
detected in approximately 2 percent of the population, and the pulmonary semilunar valve is the least frequently
involved. When a valve malfunctions, the flow of blood to a region will often be disrupted. The resulting
inadequate flow of blood to this region will be described in general terms as an insufficiency. The specific type of
insufficiency is named for the valve involved: aortic insufficiency, mitral insufficiency, tricuspid insufficiency, or
pulmonary insufficiency.
If one of the cusps of the valve is forced backward by the force of the blood, the condition is referred to as a
prolapsed valve. Prolapse may occur if the chordae tendineae are damaged or broken, causing the closure
mechanism to fail. The failure of the valve to close properly disrupts the normal one-way flow of blood and
results in regurgitation, when the blood flows backward from its normal path. Using a stethoscope, the
disruption to the normal flow of blood produces a heart murmur.
Stenosis is a condition in which the heart valves become rigid and may calcify over time. The loss of flexibility of
the valve interferes with normal function and may cause the heart to work harder to propel blood through the
valve, which eventually weakens the heart. Aortic stenosis affects approximately 2 percent of the population
over 65 years of age, and the percentage increases to approximately 4 percent in individuals over 85 years.
Occasionally, one or more of the chordae tendineae will tear or the papillary muscle itself may die as a
component of a myocardial infarction (heart attack). In this case, the patient’s condition will deteriorate
dramatically and rapidly, and immediate surgical intervention may be required.
Auscultation, or listening to a patient’s heart sounds, is one of the most useful diagnostic tools, since it is
proven, safe, and inexpensive. The term auscultation is derived from the Latin for “to listen,” and the technique
has been used for diagnostic purposes as far back as the ancient Egyptians. Valve and septal disorders will
trigger abnormal heart sounds. If a valvular disorder is detected or suspected, a test called an echocardiogram,
or simply an “echo,” may be ordered. Echocardiograms are sonograms of the heart and can help in the diagnosis
of valve disorders as well as a wide variety of heart pathologies.
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
767
of this examination, a physician becomes a board-certified cardiologist. Some board-certified cardiologists may be
invited to become a Fellow of the American College of Cardiology (FACC). This professional recognition is awarded to
outstanding physicians based upon merit, including outstanding credentials, achievements, and community
contributions to cardiovascular medicine.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/cardiologist) to learn more about cardiologists.
CAREER CONNECTION
Cardiovascular Technologist/Technician
Cardiovascular technologists/technicians are trained professionals who perform a variety of imaging techniques,
such as sonograms or echocardiograms, used by physicians to diagnose and treat diseases of the heart. Nearly all of
these positions require an associate degree, and these technicians earn a median salary of $49,410 as of May 2010,
according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Growth within the field is fast, projected at 29 percent from 2010 to
2020.
There is a considerable overlap and complementary skills between cardiac technicians and vascular technicians,
and so the term cardiovascular technician is often used. Special certifications within the field require documenting
appropriate experience and completing additional and often expensive certification examinations. These
subspecialties include Certified Rhythm Analysis Technician (CRAT), Certified Cardiographic Technician (CCT),
Registered Congenital Cardiac Sonographer (RCCS), Registered Cardiac Electrophysiology Specialist (RCES),
Registered Cardiovascular Invasive Specialist (RCIS), Registered Cardiac Sonographer (RCS), Registered Vascular
Specialist (RVS), and Registered Phlebology Sonographer (RPhS).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/cardiotech) for more information on cardiovascular technologists/technicians.
Coronary Circulation
You will recall that the heart is a remarkable pump composed largely of cardiac muscle cells that are incredibly
active throughout life. Like all other cells, a cardiomyocyte requires a reliable supply of oxygen and nutrients, and a
way to remove wastes, so it needs a dedicated, complex, and extensive coronary circulation. And because of the
critical and nearly ceaseless activity of the heart throughout life, this need for a blood supply is even greater than for
a typical cell. However, coronary circulation is not continuous; rather, it cycles, reaching a peak when the heart
muscle is relaxed and nearly ceasing while it is contracting.
Coronary Arteries
Coronary arteries supply blood to the myocardium and other components of the heart. The first portion of the aorta
after it arises from the left ventricle gives rise to the coronary arteries. There are three dilations in the wall of the
aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve. Two of these, the left posterior aortic sinus and anterior aortic
sinus, give rise to the left and right coronary arteries, respectively. The third sinus, the right posterior aortic sinus,
typically does not give rise to a vessel. Coronary vessel branches that remain on the surface of the artery and follow
the sulci are called epicardial coronary arteries.
The left coronary artery distributes blood to the left side of the heart, the left atrium and ventricle, and the
interventricular septum. The circumflex artery arises from the left coronary artery and follows the coronary sulcus
to the left. Eventually, it will fuse with the small branches of the right coronary artery. The larger anterior
interventricular artery, also known as the left anterior descending artery (LAD), is the second major branch arising
from the left coronary artery. It follows the anterior interventricular sulcus around the pulmonary trunk. Along the
way it gives rise to numerous smaller branches that interconnect with the branches of the posterior interventricular
artery, forming anastomoses. An anastomosis is an area where vessels unite to form interconnections that normally
allow blood to circulate to a region even if there may be partial blockage in another branch. The anastomoses in the
768
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
heart are very small. Therefore, this ability is somewhat restricted in the heart so a coronary artery blockage often
results in death of the cells (myocardial infarction) supplied by the particular vessel.
The right coronary artery proceeds along the coronary sulcus and distributes blood to the right atrium, portions of
both ventricles, and the heart conduction system. Normally, one or more marginal arteries arise from the right
coronary artery inferior to the right atrium. The marginal arteries supply blood to the superficial portions of the
right ventricle. On the posterior surface of the heart, the right coronary artery gives rise to the posterior
interventricular artery, also known as the posterior descending artery. It runs along the posterior portion of the
interventricular sulcus toward the apex of the heart, giving rise to branches that supply the interventricular septum
and portions of both ventricles. Figure 19.15 presents views of the coronary circulation from both the anterior and
posterior views.
FIGURE 19.15
Coronary Circulation
The anterior view of the heart shows the prominent coronary surface vessels. The posterior view
of the heart shows the prominent coronary surface vessels.
Diseases of the…
Heart: Myocardial Infarction
Myocardial infarction (MI) is the formal term for what is commonly referred to as a
heart attack. It normally results from a lack of blood flow (ischemia) and oxygen (hypoxia) to a region of the
heart, resulting in death of the cardiac muscle cells. An MI often occurs when a coronary artery is blocked by the
buildup of atherosclerotic plaque consisting of lipids, cholesterol and fatty acids, and white blood cells, primarily
macrophages. It can also occur when a portion of an unstable atherosclerotic plaque travels through the
coronary arterial system and lodges in one of the smaller vessels. The resulting blockage restricts the flow of
blood and oxygen to the myocardium and causes death of the tissue. MIs may be triggered by excessive
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
769
Coronary Veins
Coronary veins drain the heart and generally parallel the large surface arteries (see Figure 19.15). The great
cardiac vein can be seen initially on the surface of the heart following the interventricular sulcus, but it eventually
flows along the coronary sulcus into the coronary sinus on the posterior surface. The great cardiac vein initially
parallels the anterior interventricular artery and drains the areas supplied by this vessel. It receives several major
branches, including the posterior cardiac vein, the middle cardiac vein, and the small cardiac vein. The posterior
cardiac vein parallels and drains the areas supplied by the marginal artery branch of the circumflex artery. The
middle cardiac vein parallels and drains the areas supplied by the posterior interventricular artery. The small
cardiac vein parallels the right coronary artery and drains the blood from the posterior surfaces of the right atrium
and ventricle. The coronary sinus is a large, thin-walled vein on the posterior surface of the heart lying within the
atrioventricular sulcus and emptying directly into the right atrium. The anterior cardiac veins parallel the small
cardiac arteries and drain the anterior surface of the right ventricle. Unlike these other cardiac veins, it bypasses the
coronary sinus and drains directly into the right atrium.
exercise, in which the partially occluded artery is no longer able to pump sufficient quantities of blood, or severe
stress, which may induce spasm of the smooth muscle in the walls of the vessel.
In the case of acute MI, there is often sudden pain beneath the sternum (retrosternal pain) called angina
pectoris, often radiating down the left arm in males but not in female patients. Until this anomaly between the
sexes was discovered, many female patients suffering MIs were misdiagnosed and sent home. In addition,
patients typically present with difficulty breathing and shortness of breath (dyspnea), irregular heartbeat
(palpations), nausea and vomiting, sweating (diaphoresis), anxiety, and fainting (syncope), although not all of
these symptoms may be present. Many of the symptoms are shared with other medical conditions, including
anxiety attacks and simple indigestion, so differential diagnosis is critical. It is estimated that between 22 and
64 percent of MIs present without any symptoms.
An MI can be confirmed by examining the patient’s ECG, which frequently reveals alterations in the ST and Q
components. Some classification schemes of MI are referred to as ST-elevated MI (STEMI) and non-elevated MI
(non-STEMI). In addition, echocardiography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may be employed. Common
blood tests indicating an MI include elevated levels of creatine kinase MB (an enzyme that catalyzes the
conversion of creatine to phosphocreatine, consuming ATP) and cardiac troponin (the regulatory protein for
muscle contraction), both of which are released by damaged cardiac muscle cells.
Immediate treatments for MI are essential and include administering supplemental oxygen, aspirin that helps to
break up clots, and nitroglycerine administered sublingually (under the tongue) to facilitate its absorption.
Despite its unquestioned success in treatments and use since the 1880s, the mechanism of nitroglycerine is still
incompletely understood but is believed to involve the release of nitric oxide, a known vasodilator, and
endothelium-derived releasing factor, which also relaxes the smooth muscle in the tunica media of coronary
vessels. Longer-term treatments include injections of thrombolytic agents such as streptokinase that dissolve
the clot, the anticoagulant heparin, balloon angioplasty and stents to open blocked vessels, and bypass surgery
to allow blood to pass around the site of blockage. If the damage is extensive, coronary replacement with a
donor heart or coronary assist device, a sophisticated mechanical device that supplements the pumping activity
of the heart, may be employed. Despite the attention, development of artificial hearts to augment the severely
limited supply of heart donors has proven less than satisfactory but will likely improve in the future.
MIs may trigger cardiac arrest, but the two are not synonymous. Important risk factors for MI include
cardiovascular disease, age, smoking, high blood levels of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL, often referred to as
“bad” cholesterol), low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL, or “good” cholesterol), hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, obesity, lack of physical exercise, chronic kidney disease, excessive alcohol consumption, and use of
illegal drugs.
770
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Disorders of the...
Diseases of the…
Heart: Coronary Artery Disease
Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death worldwide. It occurs when the buildup of plaque—a fatty
material including cholesterol, connective tissue, white blood cells, and some smooth muscle cells—within the
walls of the arteries obstructs the flow of blood and decreases the flexibility or compliance of the vessels. This
condition is called atherosclerosis, a hardening of the arteries that involves the accumulation of plaque. As the
coronary blood vessels become occluded, the flow of blood to the tissues will be restricted, a condition called
ischemia that causes the cells to receive insufficient amounts of oxygen, called hypoxia. Figure 19.16 shows the
blockage of coronary arteries highlighted by the injection of dye. Some individuals with coronary artery disease
report pain radiating from the chest called angina pectoris, but others remain asymptomatic. If untreated,
coronary artery disease can lead to MI or a heart attack.
FIGURE 19.16
Atherosclerotic Coronary Arteries
In this coronary angiogram (X-ray), the dye makes visible two occluded
coronary arteries. Such blockages can lead to decreased blood flow (ischemia) and insufficient oxygen (hypoxia) delivered to the
cardiac tissues. If uncorrected, this can lead to cardiac muscle death (myocardial infarction).
The disease progresses slowly and often begins in children and can be seen as fatty “streaks” in the vessels. It
then gradually progresses throughout life. Well-documented risk factors include smoking, family history,
hypertension, obesity, diabetes, high alcohol consumption, lack of exercise, stress, and hyperlipidemia or high
circulating levels of lipids in the blood. Treatments may include medication, changes to diet and exercise,
angioplasty with a balloon catheter, insertion of a stent, or coronary bypass procedure.
Angioplasty is a procedure in which the occlusion is mechanically widened with a balloon. A specialized catheter
with an expandable tip is inserted into a superficial vessel, normally in the leg, and then directed to the site of
the occlusion. At this point, the balloon is inflated to compress the plaque material and to open the vessel to
increase blood flow. Then, the balloon is deflated and retracted. A stent consisting of a specialized mesh is
typically inserted at the site of occlusion to reinforce the weakened and damaged walls. Stent insertions have
been routine in cardiology for more than 40 years.
19.1 • Heart Anatomy
771
19.2 Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure of cardiac muscle
•
Identify and describe the components of the conducting system that distributes electrical impulses through the
heart
•
Compare the effect of ion movement on membrane potential of cardiac conductive and contractile cells
•
Relate characteristics of an electrocardiogram to events in the cardiac cycle
•
Identify blocks that can interrupt the cardiac cycle
Recall that cardiac muscle shares a few characteristics with both skeletal muscle and smooth muscle, but it has
some unique properties of its own. Not the least of these exceptional properties is its ability to initiate an electrical
potential at a fixed rate that spreads rapidly from cell to cell to trigger the contractile mechanism. This property is
known as autorhythmicity. Neither smooth nor skeletal muscle can do this. Even though cardiac muscle has
autorhythmicity, heart rate is modulated by the endocrine and nervous systems.
There are two major types of cardiac muscle cells: myocardial contractile cells and myocardial conducting cells. The
myocardial contractile cells constitute the bulk (99 percent) of the cells in the atria and ventricles. Contractile cells
conduct impulses and are responsible for contractions that pump blood through the body. The myocardial
conducting cells (1 percent of the cells) form the conduction system of the heart. Except for Purkinje cells, they are
generally much smaller than the contractile cells and have few of the myofibrils or filaments needed for contraction.
Their function is similar in many respects to neurons, although they are specialized muscle cells. Myocardial
conduction cells initiate and propagate the action potential (the electrical impulse) that travels throughout the heart
and triggers the contractions that propel the blood.
Structure of Cardiac Muscle
Compared to the giant cylinders of skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle cells, or cardiomyocytes, are considerably
shorter with much smaller diameters. Cardiac muscle also demonstrates striations, the alternating pattern of dark A
bands and light I bands attributed to the precise arrangement of the myofilaments and fibrils that are organized in
sarcomeres along the length of the cell (Figure 19.17a). These contractile elements are virtually identical to skeletal
muscle. T (transverse) tubules penetrate from the surface plasma membrane, the sarcolemma, to the interior of the
cell, allowing the electrical impulse to reach the interior. The T tubules are only found at the Z discs, whereas in
skeletal muscle, they are found at the junction of the A and I bands. Therefore, there are one-half as many T tubules
in cardiac muscle as in skeletal muscle. In addition, the sarcoplasmic reticulum stores few calcium ions, so most of
the calcium ions must come from outside the cells. The result is a slower onset of contraction. Mitochondria are
plentiful, providing energy for the contractions of the heart. Typically, cardiomyocytes have a single, central nucleus,
but two or more nuclei may be found in some cells.
Cardiac muscle cells branch freely. A junction between two adjoining cells is marked by a critical structure called an
intercalated disc, which helps support the synchronized contraction of the muscle (Figure 19.17b). The
sarcolemmas from adjacent cells bind together at the intercalated discs. They consist of desmosomes, specialized
linking proteoglycans, tight junctions, and large numbers of gap junctions that allow the passage of ions between the
cells and help to synchronize the contraction (Figure 19.17c). Intercellular connective tissue also helps to bind the
cells together. The importance of strongly binding these cells together is necessitated by the forces exerted by
contraction.
Coronary bypass surgery may also be performed. This surgical procedure grafts a replacement vessel obtained
from another, less vital portion of the body to bypass the occluded area. This procedure is clearly effective in
treating patients experiencing a MI, but overall does not increase longevity. Nor does it seem advisable in
patients with stable although diminished cardiac capacity since frequently loss of mental acuity occurs following
the procedure. Long-term changes to behavior, emphasizing diet and exercise plus a medicine regime tailored to
lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol and lipids, and reduce clotting are equally as effective.
772
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.17
Cardiac Muscle
(a) Cardiac muscle cells have myofibrils composed of myofilaments arranged in sarcomeres, T tubules
to transmit the impulse from the sarcolemma to the interior of the cell, numerous mitochondria for energy, and intercalated discs that are
found at the junction of different cardiac muscle cells. (b) A photomicrograph of cardiac muscle cells shows the nuclei and intercalated
discs. (c) An intercalated disc connects cardiac muscle cells and consists of desmosomes and gap junctions. LM × 1600. (Micrograph
provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Cardiac muscle undergoes aerobic respiration patterns, primarily metabolizing lipids and carbohydrates. Myoglobin,
lipids, and glycogen are all stored within the cytoplasm. Cardiac muscle cells undergo twitch-type contractions with
long refractory periods followed by brief relaxation periods. The relaxation is essential so the heart can fill with
blood for the next cycle. The refractory period is very long to prevent the possibility of tetany, a condition in which
muscle remains involuntarily contracted. In the heart, tetany is not compatible with life, since it would prevent the
heart from pumping blood.
Everyday Connection
Repair and Replacement
Damaged cardiac muscle cells have extremely limited abilities to repair themselves or to replace dead cells via
mitosis. Recent evidence indicates that at least some stem cells remain within the heart that continue to divide
and at least potentially replace these dead cells. However, newly formed or repaired cells are rarely as
functional as the original cells, and cardiac function is reduced. In the event of a heart attack or MI, dead cells
are often replaced by patches of scar tissue. Autopsies performed on individuals who had successfully received
heart transplants show some proliferation of original cells. If researchers can unlock the mechanism that
generates new cells and restore full mitotic capabilities to heart muscle, the prognosis for heart attack survivors
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
773
Conduction System of the Heart
If embryonic heart cells are separated into a Petri dish and kept alive, each is capable of generating its own
electrical impulse followed by contraction. When two independently beating embryonic cardiac muscle cells are
placed together, the cell with the higher inherent rate sets the pace, and the impulse spreads from the faster to the
slower cell to trigger a contraction. As more cells are joined together, the fastest cell continues to assume control of
the rate. A fully developed adult heart maintains the capability of generating its own electrical impulse, triggered by
the fastest cells, as part of the cardiac conduction system. The components of the cardiac conduction system
include the sinoatrial node, the atrioventricular node, the atrioventricular bundle, the atrioventricular bundle
branches, and the Purkinje cells (Figure 19.18).
FIGURE 19.18
Conduction System of the Heart
Specialized conducting components of the heart include the sinoatrial node, the
internodal pathways, the atrioventricular node, the atrioventricular bundle, the right and left bundle branches, and the Purkinje fibers.
Sinoatrial (SA) Node
Normal cardiac rhythm is established by the sinoatrial (SA) node, a specialized clump of myocardial conducting
cells located in the superior and posterior walls of the right atrium in close proximity to the orifice of the superior
vena cava. The SA node has the highest inherent rate of depolarization and is known as the pacemaker of the heart.
It initiates the sinus rhythm, or normal electrical pattern followed by contraction of the heart.
This impulse spreads from its initiation in the SA node throughout the atria through specialized internodal
pathways, to the atrial myocardial contractile cells and the atrioventricular node. The internodal pathways consist
of three bands (anterior, middle, and posterior) that lead directly from the SA node to the next node in the
conduction system, the atrioventricular node (see Figure 19.18). The impulse takes approximately 50 ms
(milliseconds) to travel between these two nodes. The relative importance of this pathway has been debated since
the impulse would reach the atrioventricular node simply following the cell-by-cell pathway through the contractile
cells of the myocardium in the atria. In addition, there is a specialized pathway called Bachmann’s bundle or the
interatrial band that conducts the impulse directly from the right atrium to the left atrium. Regardless of the
pathway, as the impulse reaches the atrioventricular septum, the connective tissue of the cardiac skeleton prevents
the impulse from spreading into the myocardial cells in the ventricles except at the atrioventricular node. Figure
19.19 illustrates the initiation of the impulse in the SA node that then spreads the impulse throughout the atria to
will be greatly enhanced. To date, myocardial cells produced within the patient (in situ) by cardiac stem cells
seem to be nonfunctional, although those grown in Petri dishes (in vitro) do beat. Perhaps soon this mystery will
be solved, and new advances in treatment will be commonplace.
774
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
the atrioventricular node.
FIGURE 19.19
Cardiac Conduction
(1) The sinoatrial (SA) node and the remainder of the conduction system are at rest. (2) The SA
node initiates the action potential, which sweeps across the atria. (3) After reaching the atrioventricular node, there is a delay of
approximately 100 ms that allows the atria to complete pumping blood before the impulse is transmitted to the atrioventricular bundle. (4)
Following the delay, the impulse travels through the atrioventricular bundle and bundle branches to the Purkinje fibers, and also reaches
the right papillary muscle via the moderator band. (5) The impulse spreads to the contractile fibers of the ventricle. (6) Ventricular
contraction begins.
The electrical event, the wave of depolarization, is the trigger for muscular contraction. The wave of depolarization
begins in the right atrium, and the impulse spreads across the superior portions of both atria and then down through
the contractile cells. The contractile cells then begin contraction from the superior to the inferior portions of the
atria, efficiently pumping blood into the ventricles.
Atrioventricular (AV) Node
The atrioventricular (AV) node is a second clump of specialized myocardial conductive cells, located in the inferior
portion of the right atrium within the atrioventricular septum. The septum prevents the impulse from spreading
directly to the ventricles without passing through the AV node. There is a critical pause before the AV node
depolarizes and transmits the impulse to the atrioventricular bundle (see Figure 19.19, step 3). This delay in
transmission is partially attributable to the small diameter of the cells of the node, which slow the impulse. Also,
conduction between nodal cells is less efficient than between conducting cells. These factors mean that it takes the
impulse approximately 100 ms to pass through the node. This pause is critical to heart function, as it allows the
atrial cardiomyocytes to complete their contraction that pumps blood into the ventricles before the impulse is
transmitted to the cells of the ventricle itself. With extreme stimulation by the SA node, the AV node can transmit
impulses maximally at 220 per minute. This establishes the typical maximum heart rate in a healthy young
individual. Damaged hearts or those stimulated by drugs can contract at higher rates, but at these rates, the heart
can no longer effectively pump blood.
Atrioventricular Bundle (Bundle of His), Bundle Branches, and Purkinje Fibers
Arising from the AV node, the atrioventricular bundle, or bundle of His, proceeds through the interventricular
septum before dividing into two atrioventricular bundle branches, commonly called the left and right bundle
branches. The left bundle branch has two fascicles. The left bundle branch supplies the left ventricle, and the right
bundle branch the right ventricle. Since the left ventricle is much larger than the right, the left bundle branch is also
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
775
considerably larger than the right. Portions of the right bundle branch are found in the moderator band and supply
the right papillary muscles. Because of this connection, each papillary muscle receives the impulse at approximately
the same time, so they begin to contract simultaneously just prior to the remainder of the myocardial contractile
cells of the ventricles. This is believed to allow tension to develop on the chordae tendineae prior to right ventricular
contraction. There is no corresponding moderator band on the left. Both bundle branches descend and reach the
apex of the heart where they connect with the Purkinje fibers (see Figure 19.19, step 4). This passage takes
approximately 25 ms.
The Purkinje fibers are additional myocardial conductive fibers that spread the impulse to the myocardial
contractile cells in the ventricles. They extend throughout the myocardium from the apex of the heart toward the
atrioventricular septum and the base of the heart. The Purkinje fibers have a fast inherent conduction rate, and the
electrical impulse reaches all of the ventricular muscle cells in about 75 ms (see Figure 19.19, step 5). Since the
electrical stimulus begins at the apex, the contraction also begins at the apex and travels toward the base of the
heart, similar to squeezing a tube of toothpaste from the bottom. This allows the blood to be pumped out of the
ventricles and into the aorta and pulmonary trunk. The total time elapsed from the initiation of the impulse in the SA
node until depolarization of the ventricles is approximately 225 ms.
Membrane Potentials and Ion Movement in Cardiac Conductive Cells
Action potentials are considerably different between cardiac conductive cells and cardiac contractive cells. While
Na+ and K+ play essential roles, Ca2+ is also critical for both types of cells. Unlike skeletal muscles and neurons,
cardiac conductive cells do not have a stable resting potential. Conductive cells contain a series of sodium ion
channels that allow a normal and slow influx of sodium ions that causes the membrane potential to rise slowly from
an initial value of −60 mV up to about –40 mV. The resulting movement of sodium ions creates spontaneous
depolarization (or prepotential depolarization). At this point, calcium ion channels open and Ca2+ enters the cell,
further depolarizing it at a more rapid rate until it reaches a value of approximately +15 mV. At this point, the
calcium ion channels close and K+ channels open, allowing outflux of K+ and resulting in repolarization. When the
membrane potential reaches approximately −60 mV, the K+ channels close and Na+ channels open, and the
prepotential phase begins again. This phenomenon explains the autorhythmicity properties of cardiac muscle
(Figure 19.20).
FIGURE 19.20
Action Potential at the SA Node
The prepotential is due to a slow influx of sodium ions until the threshold is reached
followed by a rapid depolarization and repolarization. The prepotential accounts for the membrane reaching threshold and initiates the
spontaneous depolarization and contraction of the cell. Note the lack of a resting potential.
Membrane Potentials and Ion Movement in Cardiac Contractile Cells
There is a distinctly different electrical pattern involving the contractile cells. In this case, there is a rapid
depolarization, followed by a plateau phase and then repolarization. This phenomenon accounts for the long
refractory periods required for the cardiac muscle cells to pump blood effectively before they are capable of firing
for a second time. These cardiac myocytes normally do not initiate their own electrical potential but rather wait for
an impulse to reach them.
Contractile cells demonstrate a much more stable resting phase than conductive cells at approximately −80 mV for
cells in the atria and −90 mV for cells in the ventricles. Despite this initial difference, the other components of their
action potentials are virtually identical. In both cases, when stimulated by an action potential, voltage-gated
776
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
channels rapidly open, beginning the positive-feedback mechanism of depolarization. This rapid influx of positively
charged ions raises the membrane potential to approximately +30 mV, at which point the sodium channels close.
The rapid depolarization period typically lasts 3–5 ms. Depolarization is followed by the plateau phase, in which
membrane potential declines relatively slowly. This is due in large part to the opening of the slow Ca2+ channels,
allowing Ca2+ to enter the cell while few K+ channels are open, allowing K+ to exit the cell. The relatively long
plateau phase lasts approximately 175 ms. Once the membrane potential reaches approximately zero, the Ca2+
channels close and K+ channels open, allowing K+ to exit the cell. The repolarization lasts approximately 75 ms. At
this point, membrane potential drops until it reaches resting levels once more and the cycle repeats. The entire
event lasts between 250 and 300 ms (Figure 19.21).
The absolute refractory period for cardiac contractile muscle lasts approximately 200 ms, and the relative refractory
period lasts approximately 50 ms, for a total of 250 ms. This extended period is critical, since the heart muscle must
contract to pump blood effectively and the contraction must follow the electrical events. Without extended
refractory periods, premature contractions would occur in the heart and would not be compatible with life.
FIGURE 19.21
Action Potential in Cardiac Contractile Cells
(a) Note the long plateau phase due to the influx of calcium ions. The
extended refractory period allows the cell to fully contract before another electrical event can occur. (b) The action potential for heart
muscle is compared to that of skeletal muscle.
Calcium Ions
Calcium ions play two critical roles in the physiology of cardiac muscle. Their influx through slow calcium channels
accounts for the prolonged plateau phase and absolute refractory period that enable cardiac muscle to function
properly. Calcium ions also combine with the regulatory protein troponin in the troponin-tropomyosin complex; this
complex removes the inhibition that prevents the heads of the myosin molecules from forming cross bridges with
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
777
the active sites on actin that provide the power stroke of contraction. This mechanism is virtually identical to that of
skeletal muscle. Approximately 20 percent of the calcium required for contraction is supplied by the influx of Ca2+
during the plateau phase. The remaining Ca2+ for contraction is released from storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Comparative Rates of Conduction System Firing
The pattern of prepotential or spontaneous depolarization, followed by rapid depolarization and repolarization just
described, are seen in the SA node and a few other conductive cells in the heart. Since the SA node is the
pacemaker, it reaches threshold faster than any other component of the conduction system. It will initiate the
impulses spreading to the other conducting cells. The SA node, without nervous or endocrine control, would initiate
a heart impulse approximately 80–100 times per minute. Although each component of the conduction system is
capable of generating its own impulse, the rate progressively slows as you proceed from the SA node to the Purkinje
fibers. Without the SA node, the AV node would generate a heart rate of 40–60 beats per minute. If the AV node
were blocked, the atrioventricular bundle would fire at a rate of approximately 30–40 impulses per minute. The
bundle branches would have an inherent rate of 20–30 impulses per minute, and the Purkinje fibers would fire at
15–20 impulses per minute. While a few exceptionally trained aerobic athletes demonstrate resting heart rates in
the range of 30–40 beats per minute (the lowest recorded figure is 28 beats per minute for Miguel Indurain, a
cyclist), for most individuals, rates lower than 50 beats per minute would indicate a condition called bradycardia.
Depending upon the specific individual, as rates fall much below this level, the heart would be unable to maintain
adequate flow of blood to vital tissues, initially resulting in decreasing loss of function across the systems,
unconsciousness, and ultimately death.
Electrocardiogram
By careful placement of surface electrodes on the body, it is possible to record the complex, compound electrical
signal of the heart. This tracing of the electrical signal is the electrocardiogram (ECG), also commonly abbreviated
EKG (K coming kardiology, from the German term for cardiology). Careful analysis of the ECG reveals a detailed
picture of both normal and abnormal heart function, and is an indispensable clinical diagnostic tool. The standard
electrocardiograph (the instrument that generates an ECG) uses 3, 5, or 12 leads. The greater the number of leads
an electrocardiograph uses, the more information the ECG provides. The term “lead” may be used to refer to the
cable from the electrode to the electrical recorder, but it typically describes the voltage difference between two of
the electrodes. The 12-lead electrocardiograph uses 10 electrodes placed in standard locations on the patient’s
skin (Figure 19.22). In continuous ambulatory electrocardiographs, the patient wears a small, portable, battery-
operated device known as a Holter monitor, or simply a Holter, that continuously monitors heart electrical activity,
typically for a period of 24 hours during the patient’s normal routine.
778
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.22
Standard Placement of ECG Leads
In a 12-lead ECG, six electrodes are placed on the chest, and four electrodes are
placed on the limbs.
A normal ECG tracing is presented in Figure 19.23. Each component, segment, and interval is labeled and
corresponds to important electrical events, demonstrating the relationship between these events and contraction in
the heart.
There are five prominent points on the ECG: the P wave, the QRS complex, and the T wave. The small P wave
represents the depolarization of the atria. The atria begin contracting approximately 25 ms after the start of the P
wave. The large QRS complex represents the depolarization of the ventricles, which requires a much stronger
electrical signal because of the larger size of the ventricular cardiac muscle. The ventricles begin to contract as the
QRS reaches the peak of the R wave. Lastly, the T wave represents the repolarization of the ventricles. The
repolarization of the atria occurs during the QRS complex, which masks it on an ECG.
The major segments and intervals of an ECG tracing are indicated in Figure 19.23. Segments are defined as the
regions between two waves. Intervals include one segment plus one or more waves. For example, the PR segment
begins at the end of the P wave and ends at the beginning of the QRS complex. The PR interval starts at the
beginning of the P wave and ends with the beginning of the QRS complex. The PR interval is more clinically relevant,
as it measures the duration from the beginning of atrial depolarization (the P wave) to the initiation of the QRS
complex. Since the Q wave may be difficult to view in some tracings, the measurement is often extended to the R
that is more easily visible. Should there be a delay in passage of the impulse from the SA node to the AV node, it
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
779
would be visible in the PR interval. Figure 19.24 correlates events of heart contraction to the corresponding
segments and intervals of an ECG.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/ECG) for a more detailed analysis of ECGs.
FIGURE 19.23
Electrocardiogram
A normal tracing shows the P wave, QRS complex, and T wave. Also indicated are the PR, QT, QRS,
and ST intervals, plus the P-R and S-T segments.
FIGURE 19.24
ECG Tracing Correlated to the Cardiac Cycle
This diagram correlates an ECG tracing with the electrical and
mechanical events of a heart contraction. Each segment of an ECG tracing corresponds to one event in the cardiac cycle.
Everyday Connection
ECG Abnormalities
Occassionally, an area of the heart other than the SA node will initiate an impulse that will be followed by a
780
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
premature contraction. Such an area, which may actually be a component of the conduction system or some
other contractile cells, is known as an ectopic focus or ectopic pacemaker. An ectopic focus may be stimulated
by localized ischemia; exposure to certain drugs, including caffeine, digitalis, or acetylcholine; elevated
stimulation by both sympathetic or parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system; or a number of
disease or pathological conditions. Occasional occurences are generally transitory and nonlife threatening, but if
the condition becomes chronic, it may lead to either an arrhythmia, a deviation from the normal pattern of
impulse conduction and contraction, or to fibrillation, an uncoordinated beating of the heart.
While interpretation of an ECG is possible and extremely valuable after some training, a full understanding of the
complexities and intricacies generally requires several years of experience. In general, the size of the electrical
variations, the duration of the events, and detailed vector analysis provide the most comprehensive picture of
cardiac function. For example, an amplified P wave may indicate enlargement of the atria, an enlarged Q wave
may indicate a MI, and an enlarged suppressed or inverted Q wave often indicates enlarged ventricles. T waves
often appear flatter when insufficient oxygen is being delivered to the myocardium. An elevation of the ST
segment above baseline is often seen in patients with an acute MI, and may appear depressed below the
baseline when hypoxia is occurring.
As useful as analyzing these electrical recordings may be, there are limitations. For example, not all areas
suffering a MI may be obvious on the ECG. Additionally, it will not reveal the effectiveness of the pumping, which
requires further testing, such as an ultrasound test called an echocardiogram or nuclear medicine imaging. It is
also possible for there to be pulseless electrical activity, which will show up on an ECG tracing, although there is
no corresponding pumping action. Common abnormalities that may be detected by the ECGs are shown in
Figure 19.25.
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
781
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/abnormalECG) for a more complete library of abnormal ECGs.
FIGURE 19.25
Common ECG Abnormalities
(a) In a second-degree or partial block, one-half of the P waves are not followed by
the QRS complex and T waves while the other half are. (b) In atrial fibrillation, the electrical pattern is abnormal prior to the QRS
complex, and the frequency between the QRS complexes has increased. (c) In ventricular tachycardia, the shape of the QRS complex is
abnormal. (d) In ventricular fibrillation, there is no normal electrical activity. (e) In a third-degree block, there is no correlation between
atrial activity (the P wave) and ventricular activity (the QRS complex).
Everyday Connection
External Automated Defibrillators
In the event that the electrical activity of the heart is severely disrupted, cessation of electrical activity or
fibrillation may occur. In fibrillation, the heart beats in a wild, uncontrolled manner, which prevents it from being
able to pump effectively. Atrial fibrillation (see Figure 19.25b) is a serious condition, but as long as the ventricles
continue to pump blood, the patient’s life may not be in immediate danger. Ventricular fibrillation (see Figure
19.25d) is a medical emergency that requires life support, because the ventricles are not effectively pumping
blood. In a hospital setting, it is often described as “code blue.” If untreated for as little as a few minutes,
ventricular fibrillation may lead to brain death. The most common treatment is defibrillation, which uses special
paddles to apply a charge to the heart from an external electrical source in an attempt to establish a normal
782
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
A heart block refers to an interruption in the normal conduction pathway. The nomenclature for these is very
straightforward. SA nodal blocks occur within the SA node. AV nodal blocks occur within the AV node. Infra-Hisian
blocks involve the bundle of His. Bundle branch blocks occur within either the left or right atrioventricular bundle
branches. Hemiblocks are partial and occur within one or more fascicles of the atrioventricular bundle branch.
Clinically, the most common types are the AV nodal and infra-Hisian blocks.
AV blocks are often described by degrees. A first-degree or partial block indicates a delay in conduction between the
SA and AV nodes. This can be recognized on the ECG as an abnormally long PR interval. A second-degree or
incomplete block occurs when some impulses from the SA node reach the AV node and continue, while others do
not. In this instance, the ECG would reveal some P waves not followed by a QRS complex, while others would
appear normal. In the third-degree or complete block, there is no correlation between atrial activity (the P wave)
and ventricular activity (the QRS complex). Even in the event of a total SA block, the AV node will assume the role of
pacemaker and continue initiating contractions at 40–60 contractions per minute, which is adequate to maintain
consciousness. Second- and third-degree blocks are demonstrated on the ECG presented in Figure 19.25.
When arrhythmias become a chronic problem, the heart maintains a junctional rhythm, which originates in the AV
node. In order to speed up the heart rate and restore full sinus rhythm, a cardiologist can implant an artificial
pacemaker, which delivers electrical impulses to the heart muscle to ensure that the heart continues to contract
and pump blood effectively. These artificial pacemakers are programmable by the cardiologists and can either
provide stimulation temporarily upon demand or on a continuous basis. Some devices also contain built-in
defibrillators.
Cardiac Muscle Metabolism
Normally, cardiac muscle metabolism is entirely aerobic. Oxygen from the lungs is brought to the heart, and every
other organ, attached to the hemoglobin molecules within the erythrocytes. Heart cells also store appreciable
amounts of oxygen in myoglobin. Normally, these two mechanisms, circulating oxygen and oxygen attached to
myoglobin, can supply sufficient oxygen to the heart, even during peak performance.
Fatty acids and glucose from the circulation are broken down within the mitochondria to release energy in the form
of ATP. Both fatty acid droplets and glycogen are stored within the sarcoplasm and provide additional nutrient
supply. (Seek additional content for more detail about metabolism.)
sinus rhythm (Figure 19.26). A defibrillator effectively stops the heart so that the SA node can trigger a normal
conduction cycle. Because of their effectiveness in reestablishing a normal sinus rhythm, external automated
defibrillators (EADs) are being placed in areas frequented by large numbers of people, such as schools,
restaurants, and airports. These devices contain simple and direct verbal instructions that can be followed by
nonmedical personnel in an attempt to save a life.
FIGURE 19.26
Defibrillators
(a) An external automatic defibrillator can be used by nonmedical personnel to reestablish a normal
sinus rhythm in a person with fibrillation. (b) Defibrillator paddles are more commonly used in hospital settings. (credit b:
“widerider107”/flickr.com)
19.2 • Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
783
19.3 Cardiac Cycle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the relationship between blood pressure and blood flow
•
Summarize the events of the cardiac cycle
•
Compare atrial and ventricular systole and diastole
•
Relate heart sounds detected by auscultation to action of heart’s valves
The period of time that begins with contraction of the atria and ends with ventricular relaxation is known as the
cardiac cycle (Figure 19.27). The period of contraction that the heart undergoes while it pumps blood into
circulation is called systole. The period of relaxation that occurs as the chambers fill with blood is called diastole.
Both the atria and ventricles undergo systole and diastole, and it is essential that these components be carefully
regulated and coordinated to ensure blood is pumped efficiently to the body.
FIGURE 19.27
Overview of the Cardiac Cycle
The cardiac cycle begins with atrial systole and progresses to ventricular systole, atrial
diastole, and ventricular diastole, when the cycle begins again. Correlations to the ECG are highlighted.
Pressures and Flow
Fluids, whether gases or liquids, are materials that flow according to pressure gradients—that is, they move from
regions that are higher in pressure to regions that are lower in pressure. Accordingly, when the heart chambers are
relaxed (diastole), blood will flow into the atria from the veins, which are higher in pressure. As blood flows into the
atria, the pressure will rise, so the blood will initially move passively from the atria into the ventricles. When the
action potential triggers the muscles in the atria to contract (atrial systole), the pressure within the atria rises
further, pumping blood into the ventricles. During ventricular systole, pressure rises in the ventricles, pumping blood
into the pulmonary trunk from the right ventricle and into the aorta from the left ventricle. Again, as you consider
this flow and relate it to the conduction pathway, the elegance of the system should become apparent.
784
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Phases of the Cardiac Cycle
At the beginning of the cardiac cycle, both the atria and ventricles are relaxed (diastole). Blood is flowing into the
right atrium from the superior and inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus. Blood flows into the left atrium from
the four pulmonary veins. The two atrioventricular valves, the tricuspid and mitral valves, are both open, so blood
flows unimpeded from the atria and into the ventricles. Approximately 70–80 percent of ventricular filling occurs by
this method. The two semilunar valves, the pulmonary and aortic valves, are closed, preventing backflow of blood
into the right and left ventricles from the pulmonary trunk on the right and the aorta on the left.
Atrial Systole and Diastole
Contraction of the atria follows depolarization, represented by the P wave of the ECG. As the atrial muscles contract
from the superior portion of the atria toward the atrioventricular septum, pressure rises within the atria and blood is
pumped into the ventricles through the open atrioventricular (tricuspid, and mitral or bicuspid) valves. At the start of
atrial systole, the ventricles are normally filled with approximately 70–80 percent of their capacity due to inflow
during diastole. Atrial contraction, also referred to as the “atrial kick,” contributes the remaining 20–30 percent of
filling (see Figure 19.27). Atrial systole lasts approximately 100 ms and ends prior to ventricular systole, as the atrial
muscle returns to diastole.
Ventricular Systole
Ventricular systole (see Figure 19.27) follows the depolarization of the ventricles and is represented by the QRS
complex in the ECG. It may be conveniently divided into two phases, lasting a total of 270 ms. At the end of atrial
systole and just prior to ventricular contraction, the ventricles contain approximately 130 mL blood in a resting adult
in a standing position. This volume is known as the end diastolic volume (EDV) or preload.
Initially, as the muscles in the ventricle contract, the pressure of the blood within the chamber rises, but it is not yet
high enough to open the semilunar (pulmonary and aortic) valves and be ejected from the heart. However, blood
pressure quickly rises above that of the atria that are now relaxed and in diastole. This increase in pressure causes
blood to flow back toward the atria, closing the tricuspid and mitral valves. Since blood is not being ejected from the
ventricles at this early stage, the volume of blood within the chamber remains constant. Consequently, this initial
phase of ventricular systole is known as isovolumic contraction, also called isovolumetric contraction (see Figure
19.27).
In the second phase of ventricular systole, the ventricular ejection phase, the contraction of the ventricular muscle
has raised the pressure within the ventricle to the point that it is greater than the pressures in the pulmonary trunk
and the aorta. Blood is pumped from the heart, pushing open the pulmonary and aortic semilunar valves. Pressure
generated by the left ventricle will be appreciably greater than the pressure generated by the right ventricle, since
the existing pressure in the aorta will be so much higher. Nevertheless, both ventricles pump the same amount of
blood. This quantity is referred to as stroke volume. Stroke volume will normally be in the range of 70–80 mL. Since
ventricular systole began with an EDV of approximately 130 mL of blood, this means that there is still 50–60 mL of
blood remaining in the ventricle following contraction. This volume of blood is known as the end systolic volume
(ESV).
Ventricular Diastole
Ventricular relaxation, or diastole, follows repolarization of the ventricles and is represented by the T wave of the
ECG. It too is divided into two distinct phases and lasts approximately 430 ms.
During the early phase of ventricular diastole, as the ventricular muscle relaxes, pressure on the remaining blood
within the ventricle begins to fall. When pressure within the ventricles drops below pressure in both the pulmonary
trunk and aorta, blood flows back toward the heart, producing the dicrotic notch (small dip) seen in blood pressure
tracings. The semilunar valves close to prevent backflow into the heart. Since the atrioventricular valves remain
closed at this point, there is no change in the volume of blood in the ventricle, so the early phase of ventricular
diastole is called the isovolumic ventricular relaxation phase, also called isovolumetric ventricular relaxation
phase (see Figure 19.27).
In the second phase of ventricular diastole, called late ventricular diastole, as the ventricular muscle relaxes,
pressure on the blood within the ventricles drops even further. Eventually, it drops below the pressure in the atria.
When this occurs, blood flows from the atria into the ventricles, pushing open the tricuspid and mitral valves. As
19.3 • Cardiac Cycle
785
pressure drops within the ventricles, blood flows from the major veins into the relaxed atria and from there into the
ventricles. Both chambers are in diastole, the atrioventricular valves are open, and the semilunar valves remain
closed (see Figure 19.27). The cardiac cycle is complete.
Figure 19.28 illustrates the relationship between the cardiac cycle and the ECG.
FIGURE 19.28
Relationship between the Cardiac Cycle and ECG
Initially, both the atria and ventricles are relaxed (diastole). The P
wave represents depolarization of the atria and is followed by atrial contraction (systole). Atrial systole extends until the QRS complex, at
which point, the atria relax. The QRS complex represents depolarization of the ventricles and is followed by ventricular contraction. The T
wave represents the repolarization of the ventricles and marks the beginning of ventricular relaxation.
Heart Sounds
One of the simplest, yet effective, diagnostic techniques applied to assess the state of a patient’s heart is
auscultation using a stethoscope.
In a normal, healthy heart, there are only two audible heart sounds: S1 and S2. S1 is the sound created by the
closing of the atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction and is normally described as a “lub,” or first heart
sound. The second heart sound, S2, is the sound of the closing of the semilunar valves during ventricular diastole
and is described as a “dub” (Figure 19.29). In both cases, as the valves close, the openings within the
atrioventricular septum guarded by the valves will become reduced, and blood flow through the opening will
become more turbulent until the valves are fully closed. There is a third heart sound, S3, but it is rarely heard in
healthy individuals. It may be the sound of blood flowing into the atria, or blood sloshing back and forth in the
ventricle, or even tensing of the chordae tendineae. S3 may be heard in youth, some athletes, and pregnant people.
If the sound is heard later in life, it may indicate congestive heart failure, warranting further tests. Some
cardiologists refer to the collective S1, S2, and S3 sounds as the “Kentucky gallop,” because they mimic those
produced by a galloping horse. The fourth heart sound, S4, results from the contraction of the atria pushing blood
into a stiff or hypertrophic ventricle, indicating failure of the left ventricle. S4 occurs prior to S1 and the collective
sounds S4, S1, and S2 are referred to by some cardiologists as the “Tennessee gallop,” because of their similarity to
the sound produced by a galloping horse with a different gait. A few individuals may have both S3 and S4, and this
combined sound is referred to as S7.
786
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 19.29
Heart Sounds and the Cardiac Cycle
In this illustration, the x-axis reflects time with a recording of the heart sounds.
The y-axis represents pressure.
The term murmur is used to describe an unusual sound coming from the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow
of blood. Murmurs are graded on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1 being the most common, the most difficult sound to detect,
and the least serious. The most severe is a 6. Phonocardiograms or auscultograms can be used to record both
normal and abnormal sounds using specialized electronic stethoscopes.
During auscultation, it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient to breathe deeply. This procedure not
only allows for listening to airflow, but it may also amplify heart murmurs. Inhalation increases blood flow into the
right side of the heart and may increase the amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs. Expiration partially restricts
blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided heart murmurs. Figure 19.30 indicates proper
placement of the bell of the stethoscope to facilitate auscultation.
19.3 • Cardiac Cycle
787
FIGURE 19.30
Stethoscope Placement for Auscultation
Proper placement of the bell of the stethoscope facilitates auscultation. At
each of the four locations on the chest, a different valve can be heard.
19.4 Cardiac Physiology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Relate heart rate to cardiac output
•
Describe the effect of exercise on heart rate
•
Identify cardiovascular centers and cardiac reflexes that regulate heart function
•
Describe factors affecting heart rate
•
Distinguish between positive and negative factors that affect heart contractility
•
Summarize factors affecting stroke volume and cardiac output
•
Describe the cardiac response to variations in blood flow and pressure
The autorhythmicity inherent in cardiac cells keeps the heart beating at a regular pace; however, the heart is
regulated by and responds to outside influences as well. Neural and endocrine controls are vital to the regulation of
cardiac function. In addition, the heart is sensitive to several environmental factors, including electrolytes.
Resting Cardiac Output
Cardiac output (CO) is a measurement of the amount of blood pumped by each ventricle in one minute. To calculate
this value, multiply stroke volume (SV), the amount of blood pumped by each ventricle, by heart rate (HR), in
contractions per minute (or beats per minute, bpm). It can be represented mathematically by the following
equation:
CO = HR × SV
SV is normally measured using an echocardiogram to record EDV and ESV, and calculating the difference: SV = EDV
– ESV. SV can also be measured using a specialized catheter, but this is an invasive procedure and far more
dangerous to the patient. A mean SV for a resting 70-kg (150-lb) individual would be approximately 70 mL. There
are several important variables, including size of the heart, physical and mental condition of the individual, sex,
contractility, duration of contraction, preload or EDV, and afterload or resistance. Normal range for SV would be
55–100 mL. An average resting HR would be approximately 75 bpm but could range from 60–100 in some
788
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
individuals.
Using these numbers, the mean CO is 5.25 L/min, with a range of 4.0–8.0 L/min. Remember, however, that these
numbers refer to CO from each ventricle separately, not the total for the heart. Factors influencing CO are
summarized in Figure 19.31.
FIGURE 19.31
Major Factors Influencing Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is influenced by heart rate and stroke volume, both of which
are also variable.
SVs are also used to calculate ejection fraction, which is the portion of the blood that is pumped or ejected from the
heart with each contraction. To calculate ejection fraction, SV is divided by EDV. Despite the name, the ejection
fraction is normally expressed as a percentage. Ejection fractions range from approximately 55–70 percent, with a
mean of 58 percent.
Exercise and Maximum Cardiac Output
In healthy young individuals, HR may increase to 150 bpm during exercise. SV can also increase from 70 to
approximately 130 mL due to increased strength of contraction. This would increase CO to approximately 19.5 L/
min, 4–5 times the resting rate. Top cardiovascular athletes can achieve even higher levels. At their peak
performance, they may increase resting CO by 7–8 times.
Since the heart is a muscle, exercising it increases its efficiency. The difference between maximum and resting CO is
known as the cardiac reserve. It measures the residual capacity of the heart to pump blood.
Heart Rates
HRs vary considerably, not only with exercise and fitness levels, but also with age. Newborn resting HRs may be 120
bpm. HR gradually decreases until young adulthood and then gradually increases again with age.
Maximum HRs are normally in the range of 200–220 bpm, although there are some extreme cases in which they
may reach higher levels. As one ages, the ability to generate maximum rates decreases. This may be estimated by
taking the maximal value of 220 bpm and subtracting the individual’s age. So a 40-year-old individual would be
expected to hit a maximum rate of approximately 180, and a 60-year-old person would achieve a HR of 160.
Disorders of the...
Heart: Abnormal Heart Rates
For an adult, normal resting HR will be in the range of 60–100 bpm. Bradycardia is the condition in which resting
rate drops below 60 bpm, and tachycardia is the condition in which the resting rate is above 100 bpm. Trained
athletes typically have very low HRs. If the patient is not exhibiting other symptoms, such as weakness, fatigue,
dizziness, fainting, chest discomfort, palpitations, or respiratory distress, bradycardia is not considered clinically
19.4 • Cardiac Physiology
789
Correlation Between Heart Rates and Cardiac Output
Initially, physiological conditions that cause HR to increase also trigger an increase in SV. During exercise, the rate of
blood returning to the heart increases. However as the HR rises, there is less time spent in diastole and
consequently less time for the ventricles to fill with blood. Even though there is less filling time, SV will initially
remain high. However, as HR continues to increase, SV gradually decreases due to decreased filling time. CO will
initially stabilize as the increasing HR compensates for the decreasing SV, but at very high rates, CO will eventually
decrease as increasing rates are no longer able to compensate for the decreasing SV. Consider this phenomenon in
a healthy young individual. Initially, as HR increases from resting to approximately 120 bpm, CO will rise. As HR
increases from 120 to 160 bpm, CO remains stable, since the increase in rate is offset by decreasing ventricular
filling time and, consequently, SV. As HR continues to rise above 160 bpm, CO actually decreases as SV falls faster
than HR increases. So although aerobic exercises are critical to maintain the health of the heart, individuals are
cautioned to monitor their HR to ensure they stay within the target heart rate range of between 120 and 160 bpm,
so CO is maintained. The target HR is loosely defined as the range in which both the heart and lungs receive the
maximum benefit from the aerobic workout and is dependent upon age.
Cardiovascular Centers
Nervous control over HR is centralized within the two paired cardiovascular centers of the medulla oblongata (Figure
19.32). The cardioaccelerator regions stimulate activity via sympathetic stimulation of the cardioaccelerator nerves,
and the cardioinhibitory centers decrease heart activity via parasympathetic stimulation as one component of the
vagus nerve, cranial nerve X. During rest, both centers provide slight stimulation to the heart, contributing to
autonomic tone. This is a similar concept to tone in skeletal muscles. Normally, vagal stimulation predominates as,
left unregulated, the SA node would initiate a sinus rhythm of approximately 100 bpm.
Both sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulations flow through a paired complex network of nerve fibers known
as the cardiac plexus near the base of the heart. The cardioaccelerator center also sends additional fibers, forming
the cardiac nerves via sympathetic ganglia (the cervical ganglia plus superior thoracic ganglia T1–T4) to both the SA
significant. However, if any of these symptoms are present, they may indicate that the heart is not providing
sufficient oxygenated blood to the tissues. The term relative bradycardia may be used with a patient who has a
HR in the normal range but is still suffering from these symptoms. Most patients remain asymptomatic as long
as the HR remains above 50 bpm.
Bradycardia may be caused by either inherent factors or causes external to the heart. While the condition may
be inherited, typically it is acquired in older individuals. Inherent causes include abnormalities in either the SA or
AV node. If the condition is serious, a pacemaker may be required. Other causes include ischemia to the heart
muscle or diseases of the heart vessels or valves. External causes include metabolic disorders, pathologies of
the endocrine system often involving the thyroid, electrolyte imbalances, neurological disorders including
inappropriate autonomic responses, autoimmune pathologies, over-prescription of beta blocker drugs that
reduce HR, recreational drug use, or even prolonged bed rest. Treatment relies upon establishing the underlying
cause of the disorder and may necessitate supplemental oxygen.
Tachycardia is not normal in a resting patient but may be detected in pregnant people or individuals
experiencing extreme stress. In the latter case, it would likely be triggered by stimulation from the limbic system
or disorders of the autonomic nervous system. In some cases, tachycardia may involve only the atria. Some
individuals may remain asymptomatic, but when present, symptoms may include dizziness, shortness of breath,
lightheadedness, rapid pulse, heart palpations, chest pain, or fainting (syncope). While tachycardia is defined as
a HR above 100 bpm, there is considerable variation among people. Further, the normal resting HRs of children
are often above 100 bpm, but this is not considered to be tachycardia Many causes of tachycardia may be
benign, but the condition may also be correlated with fever, anemia, hypoxia, hyperthyroidism, hypersecretion of
catecholamines, some cardiomyopathies, some disorders of the valves, and acute exposure to radiation.
Elevated rates in an exercising or resting patient are normal and expected. Resting rate should always be taken
after recovery from exercise. Treatment depends upon the underlying cause but may include medications,
implantable cardioverter defibrillators, ablation, or surgery.
790
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
and AV nodes, plus additional fibers to the atria and ventricles. The ventricles are more richly innervated by
sympathetic fibers than parasympathetic fibers. Sympathetic stimulation causes the release of the neurotransmitter
norepinephrine (NE) at the neuromuscular junction of the cardiac nerves. NE shortens the repolarization period,
thus speeding the rate of depolarization and contraction, which results in an increase in HR. It opens chemical- or
ligand-gated sodium and calcium ion channels, allowing an influx of positively charged ions.
NE binds to the beta-1 receptor. Some cardiac medications (for example, beta blockers) work by blocking these
receptors, thereby slowing HR and are one possible treatment for hypertension. Overprescription of these drugs
may lead to bradycardia and even stoppage of the heart.
FIGURE 19.32
Autonomic Innervation of the Heart
Cardioaccelerator and cardioinhibitory areas are components of the paired cardiac
centers located in the medulla oblongata of the brain. They innervate the heart via sympathetic cardiac nerves that increase cardiac activity
and vagus (parasympathetic) nerves that slow cardiac activity.
Parasympathetic stimulation originates from the cardioinhibitory region with impulses traveling via the vagus nerve
(cranial nerve X). The vagus nerve sends branches to both the SA and AV nodes, and to portions of both the atria and
ventricles. Parasympathetic stimulation releases the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) at the neuromuscular
junction. ACh slows HR by opening chemical- or ligand-gated potassium ion channels to slow the rate of
spontaneous depolarization, which extends repolarization and increases the time before the next spontaneous
depolarization occurs. Without any nervous stimulation, the SA node would establish a sinus rhythm of
approximately 100 bpm. Since resting rates are considerably less than this, it becomes evident that
parasympathetic stimulation normally slows HR. This is similar to an individual driving a car with one foot on the
brake pedal. To speed up, one need merely remove one’s foot from the break and let the engine increase speed. In
the case of the heart, decreasing parasympathetic stimulation decreases the release of ACh, which allows HR to
19.4 • Cardiac Physiology
791
increase up to approximately 100 bpm. Any increases beyond this rate would require sympathetic stimulation.
Figure 19.33 illustrates the effects of parasympathetic and sympathetic stimulation on the normal sinus rhythm.
FIGURE 19.33
Effects of Parasympathetic and Sympathetic Stimulation on Normal Sinus Rhythm
The wave of depolarization in a
normal sinus rhythm shows a stable resting HR. Following parasympathetic stimulation, HR slows. Following sympathetic stimulation, HR
increases.
Input to the Cardiovascular Center
The cardiovascular center receives input from a series of visceral receptors with impulses traveling through visceral
sensory fibers within the vagus and sympathetic nerves via the cardiac plexus. Among these receptors are various
proprioreceptors, baroreceptors, and chemoreceptors, plus stimuli from the limbic system. Collectively, these inputs
normally enable the cardiovascular centers to regulate heart function precisely, a process known as cardiac
reflexes. Increased physical activity results in increased rates of firing by various proprioreceptors located in
muscles, joint capsules, and tendons. Any such increase in physical activity would logically warrant increased blood
flow. The cardiac centers monitor these increased rates of firing, and suppress parasympathetic stimulation and
increase sympathetic stimulation as needed in order to increase blood flow.
Similarly, baroreceptors are stretch receptors located in the aortic sinus, carotid bodies, the venae cavae, and other
locations, including pulmonary vessels and the right side of the heart itself. Rates of firing from the baroreceptors
represent blood pressure, level of physical activity, and the relative distribution of blood. The cardiac centers
monitor baroreceptor firing to maintain cardiac homeostasis, a mechanism called the baroreceptor reflex. With
increased pressure and stretch, the rate of baroreceptor firing increases, and the cardiac centers decrease
sympathetic stimulation and increase parasympathetic stimulation. As pressure and stretch decrease, the rate of
792
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
baroreceptor firing decreases, and the cardiac centers increase sympathetic stimulation and decrease
parasympathetic stimulation.
There is a similar reflex, called the atrial reflex or Bainbridge reflex, associated with varying rates of blood flow to
the atria. Increased venous return stretches the walls of the atria where specialized baroreceptors are located.
However, as the atrial baroreceptors increase their rate of firing and as they stretch due to the increased blood
pressure, the cardiac center responds by increasing sympathetic stimulation and inhibiting parasympathetic
stimulation to increase HR. The opposite is also true.
Increased metabolic byproducts associated with increased activity, such as carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, and
lactic acid, plus falling oxygen levels, are detected by a suite of chemoreceptors innervated by the glossopharyngeal
and vagus nerves. These chemoreceptors provide feedback to the cardiovascular centers about the need for
increased or decreased blood flow, based on the relative levels of these substances.
The limbic system can also significantly impact HR related to emotional state. During periods of stress, it is not
unusual to identify higher than normal HRs, often accompanied by a surge in the stress hormone cortisol.
Individuals experiencing extreme anxiety may manifest panic attacks with symptoms that resemble those of heart
attacks. These events are typically transient and treatable. Meditation techniques have been developed to ease
anxiety and have been shown to lower HR effectively. Doing simple deep and slow breathing exercises with one’s
eyes closed can also significantly reduce this anxiety and HR.
Other Factors Influencing Heart Rate
Using a combination of autorhythmicity and innervation, the cardiovascular center is able to provide relatively
precise control over HR. However, there are a number of other factors that have an impact on HR as well, including
epinephrine, NE, and thyroid hormones; levels of various ions including calcium, potassium, and sodium; body
temperature; hypoxia; and pH balance (Table 19.1 and Table 19.2). After reading this section, the importance of
maintaining homeostasis should become even more apparent.
Disorders of the...
Heart: Broken Heart Syndrome
Extreme stress from such life events as the death of a loved one, an emotional break up, loss of income, or
foreclosure of a home may lead to a condition commonly referred to as broken heart syndrome. This condition
may also be called Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, transient apical ballooning syndrome, apical ballooning
cardiomyopathy, stress-induced cardiomyopathy, Gebrochenes-Herz syndrome, and stress cardiomyopathy. The
recognized effects on the heart include congestive heart failure due to a profound weakening of the myocardium
not related to lack of oxygen. This may lead to acute heart failure, lethal arrhythmias, or even the rupture of a
ventricle. The exact etiology is not known, but several factors have been suggested, including transient
vasospasm, dysfunction of the cardiac capillaries, or thickening of the myocardium—particularly in the left
ventricle—that may lead to the critical circulation of blood to this region. While many patients survive the initial
acute event with treatment to restore normal function, there is a strong correlation with death. Careful statistical
analysis by the Jaap Spreeuw and Iqbal Owadally of Bayes Business School in London, revealed that within one
year of the death of a loved one, women are more than twice as likely to die and men are six times as likely to die
as would otherwise be expected. The same study indicated that longer relationships also had a greater
incidence of a person dying soon after the death of their spouse.
19.4 • Cardiac Physiology
793
Major Factors Increasing Heart Rate and Force of Contraction
Factor
Effect
Cardioaccelerator
nerves
Release of norepinephrine by cardioaccelerator nerves
Proprioreceptors
Increased firing rates of proprioreceptors (e.g. during exercise)
Chemoreceptors
Chemoreceptors sensing decreased levels of O2 or increased levels of H+, CO2 and
lactic acid
Baroreceptors
Decreased firing rates of baroreceptors (indicating falling blood volume/pressure)
Limbic system
Anticipation of physical exercise or strong emotions by the limbic system
Catecholamines
Decreased epinephrine and norepinephrine release by the adrenal glands
Thyroid hormones
Increased T3 and T4 in the blood (released by thyroid)
Calcium
Decrease in calcium ions in the blood
Potassium
Decrease in potassium ions in the blood
Sodium
Decrease in sodium ions in the blood
Body temperature
Increase in body temperature
Nicotine and caffeine
Presence of nicotine, caffeine or other stimulants
TABLE 19.1
Factors Decreasing Heart Rate and Force of Contraction
Factor
Effect
Cardioinhibitor nerves
(vagus)
Release of acetylcholine by cardioinhibitor nerves
Proprioreceptors
Decreased firing rates of proprioreceptors (e.g. during rest)
Chemoreceptors
Chemoreceptors sensing increased levels of O2 or decreased levels of H+, CO2 and
lactic acid
Baroreceptors
Increased firing rates of baroreceptors (indicating rising blood volume/pressure)
Limbic system
Anticipation of relaxation by the limbic system
Catecholamines
Decreased epinephrine and norepinephrine release by the adrenal glands
TABLE 19.2
794
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Factor
Effect
Thyroid hormones
Decreased T3 and T4 in the blood (released by thyroid)
Calcium
Decrease in calcium ions in the blood
Potassium
Increase in potassium ions in the blood
Sodium
Increase in sodium ions in the blood
Body temperature
Decrease in body temperature
Opiates and tranquilizers
Presence of opiates (heroin), tranquilizers or other depressants
TABLE 19.2
Epinephrine and Norepinephrine
The catecholamines, epinephrine and NE, secreted by the adrenal medulla form one component of the extended
fight-or-flight mechanism. The other component is sympathetic stimulation. Epinephrine and NE have similar
effects: binding to the beta-1 receptors, and opening sodium and calcium ion chemical- or ligand-gated channels.
The rate of depolarization is increased by this additional influx of positively charged ions, so the threshold is reached
more quickly and the period of repolarization is shortened. However, massive releases of these hormones coupled
with sympathetic stimulation may actually lead to arrhythmias. There is no parasympathetic stimulation to the
adrenal medulla.
Thyroid Hormones
In general, increased levels of thyroid hormone, or thyroxin, increase cardiac rate and contractility. The impact of
thyroid hormone is typically of a much longer duration than that of the catecholamines. The physiologically active
form of thyroid hormone, T3 or triiodothyronine, has been shown to directly enter cardiomyocytes and alter activity
at the level of the genome. It also impacts the beta adrenergic response similar to epinephrine and NE described
above. Excessive levels of thyroxin may trigger tachycardia.
Calcium
Calcium ion levels have great impacts upon both HR and contractility; as the levels of calcium ions increase, so do
HR and contractility. High levels of calcium ions (hypercalcemia) may be implicated in a short QT interval and a
widened T wave in the ECG. The QT interval represents the time from the start of depolarization to repolarization of
the ventricles, and includes the period of ventricular systole. Extremely high levels of calcium may induce cardiac
arrest. Drugs known as calcium channel blockers slow HR by binding to these channels and blocking or slowing the
inward movement of calcium ions.
Caffeine and Nicotine
Caffeine and nicotine are not found naturally within the body. Both of these nonregulated drugs have an excitatory
effect on membranes of neurons in general and have a stimulatory effect on the cardiac centers specifically, causing
an increase in HR. Caffeine works by increasing the rates of depolarization at the SA node, whereas nicotine
stimulates the activity of the sympathetic neurons that deliver impulses to the heart.
Although it is the world’s most widely consumed psychoactive drug, caffeine is legal and not regulated. While
precise quantities have not been established, “normal” consumption is not considered harmful to most people,
although it may cause disruptions to sleep and acts as a diuretic. Its consumption by pregnant people is cautioned
against, although no evidence of negative effects has been confirmed. Tolerance and even physical and mental
addiction to the drug result in individuals who routinely consume the substance.
Nicotine, too, is a stimulant and produces addiction. While legal and nonregulated, concerns about nicotine’s safety
and documented links to respiratory and cardiac disease have resulted in warning labels on cigarette packages.
19.4 • Cardiac Physiology
795
Factors Decreasing Heart Rate
HR can be slowed when a person experiences altered sodium and potassium levels, hypoxia, acidosis, alkalosis, and
hypothermia (see Table 19.1). The relationship between electrolytes and HR is complex, but maintaining electrolyte
balance is critical to the normal wave of depolarization. Of the two ions, potassium has the greater clinical
significance. Initially, both hyponatremia (low sodium levels) and hypernatremia (high sodium levels) may lead to
tachycardia. Severely high hypernatremia may lead to fibrillation, which may cause CO to cease. Severe
hyponatremia leads to both bradycardia and other arrhythmias. Hypokalemia (low potassium levels) also leads to
arrhythmias, whereas hyperkalemia (high potassium levels) causes the heart to become weak and flaccid, and
ultimately to fail.
Acidosis is a condition in which excess hydrogen ions are present, and the patient’s blood expresses a low pH value.
Alkalosis is a condition in which there are too few hydrogen ions, and the patient’s blood has an elevated pH. Normal
blood pH falls in the range of 7.35–7.45, so a number lower than this range represents acidosis and a higher number
represents alkalosis. Recall that enzymes are the regulators or catalysts of virtually all biochemical reactions; they
are sensitive to pH and will change shape slightly with values outside their normal range. These variations in pH and
accompanying slight physical changes to the active site on the enzyme decrease the rate of formation of the
enzyme-substrate complex, subsequently decreasing the rate of many enzymatic reactions, which can have
complex effects on HR. Severe changes in pH will lead to denaturation of the enzyme.
The last variable is body temperature. Elevated body temperature is called hyperthermia, and suppressed body
temperature is called hypothermia. Slight hyperthermia results in increasing HR and strength of contraction.
Hypothermia slows the rate and strength of heart contractions. This distinct slowing of the heart is one component
of the larger diving reflex that diverts blood to essential organs while submerged. If sufficiently chilled, the heart will
stop beating, a technique that may be employed during open heart surgery. In this case, the patient’s blood is
normally diverted to an artificial heart-lung machine to maintain the body’s blood supply and gas exchange until the
surgery is complete, and sinus rhythm can be restored. Excessive hyperthermia and hypothermia will both result in
death, as enzymes drive the body systems to cease normal function, beginning with the central nervous system.
Stroke Volume
Many of the same factors that regulate HR also impact cardiac function by altering SV. While a number of variables
are involved, SV is ultimately dependent upon the difference between EDV and ESV. The three primary factors to
consider are preload, or the stretch on the ventricles prior to contraction; the contractility, or the force or strength of
the contraction itself; and afterload, the force the ventricles must generate to pump blood against the resistance in
the vessels. These factors are summarized in Table 19.1 and Table 19.2.
Preload
Preload is another way of expressing EDV. Therefore, the greater the EDV is, the greater the preload is. One of the
primary factors to consider is filling time, or the duration of ventricular diastole during which filling occurs. The
more rapidly the heart contracts, the shorter the filling time becomes, and the lower the EDV and preload are. This
effect can be partially overcome by increasing the second variable, contractility, and raising SV, but over time, the
heart is unable to compensate for decreased filling time, and preload also decreases.
With increasing ventricular filling, both EDV or preload increase, and the cardiac muscle itself is stretched to a
greater degree. At rest, there is little stretch of the ventricular muscle, and the sarcomeres remain short. With
increased ventricular filling, the ventricular muscle is increasingly stretched and the sarcomere length increases. As
the sarcomeres reach their optimal lengths, they will contract more powerfully, because more of the myosin heads
can bind to the actin on the thin filaments, forming cross bridges and increasing the strength of contraction and SV.
If this process were to continue and the sarcomeres stretched beyond their optimal lengths, the force of contraction
would decrease. However, due to the physical constraints of the location of the heart, this excessive stretch is not a
concern.
The relationship between ventricular stretch and contraction has been stated in the well-known Frank-Starling
mechanism or simply Starling’s Law of the Heart. This principle states that, within physiological limits, the force of
heart contraction is directly proportional to the initial length of the muscle fiber. This means that the greater the
stretch of the ventricular muscle (within limits), the more powerful the contraction is, which in turn increases SV.
Therefore, by increasing preload, you increase the second variable, contractility.
796
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Otto Frank (1865–1944) was a German physiologist; among his many published works are detailed studies of this
important heart relationship. Ernest Starling (1866–1927) was an important English physiologist who also studied
the heart. Although they worked largely independently, their combined efforts and similar conclusions have been
recognized in the name “Frank-Starling mechanism.”
Any sympathetic stimulation to the venous system will increase venous return to the heart, which contributes to
ventricular filling, and EDV and preload. While much of the ventricular filling occurs while both atria and ventricles
are in diastole, the contraction of the atria, the atrial kick, plays a crucial role by providing the last 20–30 percent of
ventricular filling.
Contractility
It is virtually impossible to consider preload or ESV without including an early mention of the concept of
contractility. Indeed, the two parameters are intimately linked. Contractility refers to the force of the contraction of
the heart muscle, which controls SV, and is the primary parameter for impacting ESV. The more forceful the
contraction is, the greater the SV and smaller the ESV are. Less forceful contractions result in smaller SVs and larger
ESVs. Factors that increase contractility are described as positive inotropic factors, and those that decrease
contractility are described as negative inotropic factors (ino- = “fiber;” -tropic = “turning toward”).
Not surprisingly, sympathetic stimulation is a positive inotrope, whereas parasympathetic stimulation is a negative
inotrope. Sympathetic stimulation triggers the release of NE at the neuromuscular junction from the cardiac nerves
and also stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete epinephrine and NE. In addition to their stimulatory effects on HR,
they also bind to both alpha and beta receptors on the cardiac muscle cell membrane to increase metabolic rate and
the force of contraction. This combination of actions has the net effect of increasing SV and leaving a smaller
residual ESV in the ventricles. In comparison, parasympathetic stimulation releases ACh at the neuromuscular
junction from the vagus nerve. The membrane hyperpolarizes and inhibits contraction to decrease the strength of
contraction and SV, and to raise ESV. Since parasympathetic fibers are more widespread in the atria than in the
ventricles, the primary site of action is in the upper chambers. Parasympathetic stimulation in the atria decreases
the atrial kick and reduces EDV, which decreases ventricular stretch and preload, thereby further limiting the force
of ventricular contraction. Stronger parasympathetic stimulation also directly decreases the force of contraction of
the ventricles.
Several synthetic drugs, including dopamine and isoproterenol, have been developed that mimic the effects of
epinephrine and NE by stimulating the influx of calcium ions from the extracellular fluid. Higher concentrations of
intracellular calcium ions increase the strength of contraction. Excess calcium (hypercalcemia) also acts as a
positive inotropic agent. The drug digitalis lowers HR and increases the strength of the contraction, acting as a
positive inotropic agent by blocking the sequestering of calcium ions into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This leads to
higher intracellular calcium levels and greater strength of contraction. In addition to the catecholamines from the
adrenal medulla, other hormones also demonstrate positive inotropic effects. These include thyroid hormones and
glucagon from the pancreas.
Negative inotropic agents include hypoxia, acidosis, hyperkalemia, and a variety of synthetic drugs. These include
numerous beta blockers and calcium channel blockers. Early beta blocker drugs include propranolol and
pronethalol, and are credited with revolutionizing treatment of cardiac patients experiencing angina pectoris. There
is also a large class of dihydropyridine, phenylalkylamine, and benzothiazepine calcium channel blockers that may
be administered decreasing the strength of contraction and SV.
Afterload
Afterload refers to the tension that the ventricles must develop to pump blood effectively against the resistance in
the vascular system. Any condition that increases resistance requires a greater afterload to force open the
semilunar valves and pump the blood. Damage to the valves, such as stenosis, which makes them harder to open
will also increase afterload. Any decrease in resistance decreases the afterload. Figure 19.34 summarizes the major
factors influencing SV, Figure 19.35 summarizes the major factors influencing CO, and Table 19.3 and Table 19.4
summarize cardiac responses to increased and decreased blood flow and pressure in order to restore homeostasis.
19.4 • Cardiac Physiology
797
FIGURE 19.34
Major Factors Influencing Stroke Volume
Multiple factors impact preload, afterload, and contractility, and are the
major considerations influencing SV.
FIGURE 19.35
Summary of Major Factors Influencing Cardiac Output
The primary factors influencing HR include autonomic
innervation plus endocrine control. Not shown are environmental factors, such as electrolytes, metabolic products, and temperature. The
primary factors controlling SV include preload, contractility, and afterload. Other factors such as electrolytes may be classified as either
positive or negative inotropic agents.
798
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Cardiac Response to Decreasing Blood Flow and Pressure Due to Decreasing Cardiac Output
Baroreceptors (aorta, carotid arteries, venae
cavae, and atria)
Chemoreceptors (both central nervous
system and in proximity to baroreceptors)
Sensitive
to
Decreasing stretch
Decreasing O2 and increasing CO2, H+, and lactic
acid
Target
Parasympathetic stimulation suppressed
Sympathetic stimulation increased
Response
of heart
Increasing heart rate and increasing stroke
volume
Increasing heart rate and increasing stroke
volume
Overall
effect
Increasing blood flow and pressure due to
increasing cardiac output; homeostasis restored
Increasing blood flow and pressure due to
increasing cardiac output; homeostasis restored
TABLE 19.3
Cardiac Response to Increasing Blood Flow and Pressure Due to Increasing Cardiac Output
Baroreceptors (aorta, carotid arteries, venae
cavae, and atria)
Chemoreceptors (both central nervous
system and in proximity to baroreceptors)
Sensitive
to
Increasing stretch
Increasing O2 and decreasing CO2, H+, and
lactic acid
Target
Parasympathetic stimulation increased
Sympathetic stimulation suppressed
Response
of heart
Decreasing heart rate and decreasing stroke
volume
Decreasing heart rate and decreasing stroke
volume
Overall
effect
Decreasing blood flow and pressure due to
decreasing cardiac output; homeostasis
restored
Decreasing blood flow and pressure due to
decreasing cardiac output; homeostasis
restored
TABLE 19.4
19.5 Development of the Heart
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the embryological development of heart structures
•
Identify five regions of the fetal heart
•
Relate fetal heart structures to adult counterparts
The human heart is the first functional organ to develop. It begins beating and pumping blood around day 21 or 22,
a mere three weeks after fertilization. This emphasizes the critical nature of the heart in distributing blood through
the vessels and the vital exchange of nutrients, oxygen, and wastes both to and from the developing baby. The
critical early development of the heart is reflected by the prominent heart bulge that appears on the anterior
surface of the embryo.
The heart forms from an embryonic tissue called mesoderm around 18 to 19 days after fertilization. Mesoderm is
one of the three primary germ layers that differentiates early in development that collectively gives rise to all
subsequent tissues and organs. The heart begins to develop near the head of the embryo in a region known as the
19.5 • Development of the Heart
799
cardiogenic area. Following chemical signals called factors from the underlying endoderm (another of the three
primary germ layers), the cardiogenic area begins to form two strands called the cardiogenic cords (Figure 19.36).
As the cardiogenic cords develop, a lumen rapidly develops within them. At this point, they are referred to as
endocardial tubes. The two tubes migrate together and fuse to form a single primitive heart tube. The primitive
heart tube quickly forms five distinct regions. From head to tail, these include the truncus arteriosus, bulbus cordis,
primitive ventricle, primitive atrium, and the sinus venosus. Initially, all venous blood flows into the sinus venosus,
and contractions propel the blood from tail to head, or from the sinus venosus to the truncus arteriosus. This is a
very different pattern from that of an adult.
FIGURE 19.36
Development of the Human Heart
This diagram outlines the embryological development of the human heart during the
first eight weeks and the subsequent formation of the four heart chambers.
The five regions of the primitive heart tube develop into recognizable structures in a fully developed heart. The
truncus arteriosus will eventually divide and give rise to the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk. The bulbus
cordis develops into the right ventricle. The primitive ventricle forms the left ventricle. The primitive atrium
becomes the anterior portions of both the right and left atria, and the two auricles. The sinus venosus develops into
the posterior portion of the right atrium, the SA node, and the coronary sinus.
As the primitive heart tube elongates, it begins to fold within the pericardium, eventually forming an S shape, which
places the chambers and major vessels into an alignment similar to the adult heart. This process occurs between
days 23 and 28. The remainder of the heart development pattern includes development of septa and valves, and
remodeling of the actual chambers. Partitioning of the atria and ventricles by the interatrial septum, interventricular
septum, and atrioventricular septum is complete by the end of the fifth week, although the fetal blood shunts
remain until birth or shortly after. The atrioventricular valves form between weeks five and eight, and the semilunar
valves form between weeks five and nine.
800
19 • The Cardiovascular System: The Heart
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
afterload
force the ventricles must develop to
effectively pump blood against the resistance in the
vessels
anastomosis
(plural = anastomoses) area where
vessels unite to allow blood to circulate even if there
may be partial blockage in another branch
anterior cardiac veins
vessels that parallel the small
cardiac arteries and drain the anterior surface of the
right ventricle; bypass the coronary sinus and drain
directly into the right atrium
anterior interventricular artery
(also, left anterior
descending artery or LAD) major branch of the left
coronary artery that follows the anterior
interventricular sulcus
anterior interventricular sulcus
sulcus located
between the left and right ventricles on the anterior
surface of the heart
aortic valve
(also, aortic semilunar valve) valve
located at the base of the aorta
artificial pacemaker
medical device that transmits
electrical signals to the heart to ensure that it
contracts and pumps blood to the body
atrial reflex
(also, called Bainbridge reflex)
autonomic reflex that responds to stretch receptors
in the atria that send impulses to the
cardioaccelerator area to increase HR when venous
flow into the atria increases
atrioventricular (AV) node
clump of myocardial cells
located in the inferior portion of the right atrium
within the atrioventricular septum; receives the
impulse from the SA node, pauses, and then
transmits it into specialized conducting cells within
the interventricular septum
atrioventricular bundle
(also, bundle of His) group of
specialized myocardial conductile cells that
transmit the impulse from the AV node through the
interventricular septum; form the left and right
atrioventricular bundle branches
atrioventricular bundle branches
(also, left or right
bundle branches) specialized myocardial conductile
cells that arise from the bifurcation of the
atrioventricular bundle and pass through the
interventricular septum; lead to the Purkinje fibers
and also to the right papillary muscle via the
moderator band
atrioventricular septum
cardiac septum located
between the atria and ventricles; atrioventricular
valves are located here
atrioventricular valves
one-way valves located
between the atria and ventricles; the valve on the
right is called the tricuspid valve, and the one on the
left is the mitral or bicuspid valve
atrium
(plural = atria) upper or receiving chamber of
the heart that pumps blood into the lower chambers
just prior to their contraction; the right atrium
receives blood from the systemic circuit that flows
into the right ventricle; the left atrium receives
blood from the pulmonary circuit that flows into the
left ventricle
auricle
extension of an atrium visible on the superior
surface of the heart
autonomic tone
contractile state during resting
cardiac activity produced by mild sympathetic and
parasympathetic stimulation
autorhythmicity
ability of cardiac muscle to initiate
its own electrical impulse that triggers the
mechanical contraction that pumps blood at a fixed
pace without nervous or endocrine control
Bachmann’s bundle
(also, interatrial band) group of
specialized conducting cells that transmit the
impulse directly from the SA node in the right atrium
to the left atrium
Bainbridge reflex
(also, called atrial reflex)
autonomic reflex that responds to stretch receptors
in the atria that send impulses to the
cardioaccelerator area to increase HR when venous
flow into the atria increases
baroreceptor reflex
autonomic reflex in which the
cardiac centers monitor signals from the
baroreceptor stretch receptors and regulate heart
function based on blood flow
bicuspid valve
(also, mitral valve or left
atrioventricular valve) valve located between the left
atrium and ventricle; consists of two flaps of tissue
bulbus cordis
portion of the primitive heart tube that
will eventually develop into the right ventricle
bundle of His
(also, atrioventricular bundle) group of
specialized myocardial conductile cells that
transmit the impulse from the AV node through the
interventricular septum; form the left and right
atrioventricular bundle branches
cardiac cycle
period of time between the onset of
atrial contraction (atrial systole) and ventricular
relaxation (ventricular diastole)
cardiac notch
depression in the medial surface of the
inferior lobe of the left lung where the apex of the
heart is located
cardiac output (CO)
amount of blood pumped by
each ventricle during one minute; equals HR
multiplied by SV
cardiac plexus
paired complex network of nerve
fibers near the base of the heart that receive
sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulations to
regulate HR
19 • Key Terms
801
cardiac reflexes
series of autonomic reflexes that
enable the cardiovascular centers to regulate heart
function based upon sensory information from a
variety of visceral sensors
cardiac reserve
difference between maximum and
resting CO
cardiac skeleton
(also, skeleton of the heart)
reinforced connective tissue located within the
atrioventricular septum; includes four rings that
surround the openings between the atria and
ventricles, and the openings to the pulmonary trunk
and aorta; the point of attachment for the heart
valves
cardiogenic area
area near the head of the embryo
where the heart begins to develop 18–19 days after
fertilization
cardiogenic cords
two strands of tissue that form
within the cardiogenic area
cardiomyocyte
muscle cell of the heart
chordae tendineae
string-like extensions of tough
connective tissue that extend from the flaps of the
atrioventricular valves to the papillary muscles
circumflex artery
branch of the left coronary artery
that follows coronary sulcus
coronary arteries
branches of the ascending aorta
that supply blood to the heart; the left coronary
artery feeds the left side of the heart, the left atrium
and ventricle, and the interventricular septum; the
right coronary artery feeds the right atrium, portions
of both ventricles, and the heart conduction system
coronary sinus
large, thin-walled vein on the
posterior surface of the heart that lies within the
atrioventricular sulcus and drains the heart
myocardium directly into the right atrium
coronary sulcus
sulcus that marks the boundary
between the atria and ventricles
coronary veins
vessels that drain the heart and
generally parallel the large surface arteries
diastole
period of time when the heart muscle is
relaxed and the chambers fill with blood
ejection fraction
portion of the blood that is pumped
or ejected from the heart with each contraction;
mathematically represented by SV divided by EDV
electrocardiogram (ECG)
surface recording of the
electrical activity of the heart that can be used for
diagnosis of irregular heart function; also
abbreviated as EKG
end diastolic volume (EDV)
(also, preload) the
amount of blood in the ventricles at the end of atrial
systole just prior to ventricular contraction
end systolic volume (ESV)
amount of blood
remaining in each ventricle following systole
endocardial tubes
stage in which lumens form within
the expanding cardiogenic cords, forming hollow
structures
endocardium
innermost layer of the heart lining the
heart chambers and heart valves; composed of
endothelium reinforced with a thin layer of
connective tissue that binds to the myocardium
endothelium
layer of smooth, simple squamous
epithelium that lines the endocardium and blood
vessels
epicardial coronary arteries
surface arteries of the
heart that generally follow the sulci
epicardium
innermost layer of the serous
pericardium and the outermost layer of the heart
wall
filling time
duration of ventricular diastole during
which filling occurs
foramen ovale
opening in the fetal heart that allows
blood to flow directly from the right atrium to the
left atrium, bypassing the fetal pulmonary circuit
fossa ovalis
oval-shaped depression in the interatrial
septum that marks the former location of the
foramen ovale
Frank-Starling mechanism
relationship between
ventricular stretch and contraction in which the
force of heart contraction is directly proportional to
the initial length of the muscle fiber
great cardiac vein
vessel that follows the
interventricular sulcus on the anterior surface of the
heart and flows along the coronary sulcus into the
coronary sinus on the posterior surface; parallels
the anterior interventricular artery and drains the
areas supplied by this vessel
heart block
interruption in the normal conduction
pathway
heart bulge
prominent feature on the anterior
surface of the heart, reflecting early cardiac
development
heart rate (HR)
number of times the heart contracts
(beats) per minute
heart sounds
sounds heard via auscultation with a
stethoscope of the closing of the atrioventricular
valves (“lub”) and semilunar valves (“dub”)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
pathological
enlargement of the heart, generally for no known
reason
inferior vena cava
large systemic vein that returns
blood to the heart from the inferior portion of the
body
interatrial band
(also, Bachmann’s bundle) group of
specialized conducting cells that transmit the
impulse directly from the SA node in the right atrium
to the left atrium
interatrial septum
cardiac septum located between
802
19 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
the two atria; contains the fossa ovalis after birth
intercalated disc
physical junction between adjacent
cardiac muscle cells; consisting of desmosomes,
specialized linking proteoglycans, and gap junctions
that allow passage of ions between the two cells
internodal pathways
specialized conductile cells
within the atria that transmit the impulse from the
SA node throughout the myocardial cells of the
atrium and to the AV node
interventricular septum
cardiac septum located
between the two ventricles
isovolumic contraction
(also, isovolumetric
contraction) initial phase of ventricular contraction
in which tension and pressure in the ventricle
increase, but no blood is pumped or ejected from
the heart
isovolumic ventricular relaxation phase
initial
phase of the ventricular diastole when pressure in
the ventricles drops below pressure in the two
major arteries, the pulmonary trunk, and the aorta,
and blood attempts to flow back into the ventricles,
producing the dicrotic notch of the ECG and closing
the two semilunar valves
left atrioventricular valve
(also, mitral valve or
bicuspid valve) valve located between the left
atrium and ventricle; consists of two flaps of tissue
marginal arteries
branches of the right coronary
artery that supply blood to the superficial portions
of the right ventricle
mesoderm
one of the three primary germ layers that
differentiate early in embryonic development
mesothelium
simple squamous epithelial portion of
serous membranes, such as the superficial portion
of the epicardium (the visceral pericardium) and the
deepest portion of the pericardium (the parietal
pericardium)
middle cardiac vein
vessel that parallels and drains
the areas supplied by the posterior interventricular
artery; drains into the great cardiac vein
mitral valve
(also, left atrioventricular valve or
bicuspid valve) valve located between the left
atrium and ventricle; consists of two flaps of tissue
moderator band
band of myocardium covered by
endocardium that arises from the inferior portion of
the interventricular septum in the right ventricle and
crosses to the anterior papillary muscle; contains
conductile fibers that carry electrical signals
followed by contraction of the heart
murmur
unusual heart sound detected by
auscultation; typically related to septal or valve
defects
myocardial conducting cells
specialized cells that
transmit electrical impulses throughout the heart
and trigger contraction by the myocardial contractile
cells
myocardial contractile cells
bulk of the cardiac
muscle cells in the atria and ventricles that conduct
impulses and contract to propel blood
myocardium
thickest layer of the heart composed of
cardiac muscle cells built upon a framework of
primarily collagenous fibers and blood vessels that
supply it and the nervous fibers that help to regulate
it
negative inotropic factors
factors that negatively
impact or lower heart contractility
P wave
component of the electrocardiogram that
represents the depolarization of the atria
pacemaker
cluster of specialized myocardial cells
known as the SA node that initiates the sinus
rhythm
papillary muscle
extension of the myocardium in the
ventricles to which the chordae tendineae attach
pectinate muscles
muscular ridges seen on the
anterior surface of the right atrium
pericardial cavity
cavity surrounding the heart filled
with a lubricating serous fluid that reduces friction
as the heart contracts
pericardial sac
(also, pericardium) membrane that
separates the heart from other mediastinal
structures; consists of two distinct, fused sublayers:
the fibrous pericardium and the parietal pericardium
pericardium
(also, pericardial sac) membrane that
separates the heart from other mediastinal
structures; consists of two distinct, fused sublayers:
the fibrous pericardium and the parietal pericardium
positive inotropic factors
factors that positively
impact or increase heart contractility
posterior cardiac vein
vessel that parallels and
drains the areas supplied by the marginal artery
branch of the circumflex artery; drains into the great
cardiac vein
posterior interventricular artery
(also, posterior
descending artery) branch of the right coronary
artery that runs along the posterior portion of the
interventricular sulcus toward the apex of the heart
and gives rise to branches that supply the
interventricular septum and portions of both
ventricles
posterior interventricular sulcus
sulcus located
between the left and right ventricles on the
posterior surface of the heart
preload
(also, end diastolic volume) amount of blood
in the ventricles at the end of atrial systole just prior
to ventricular contraction
prepotential depolarization
(also, spontaneous
depolarization) mechanism that accounts for the
19 • Key Terms
803
autorhythmic property of cardiac muscle; the
membrane potential increases as sodium ions
diffuse through the always-open sodium ion
channels and causes the electrical potential to rise
primitive atrium
portion of the primitive heart tube
that eventually becomes the anterior portions of
both the right and left atria, and the two auricles
primitive heart tube
singular tubular structure that
forms from the fusion of the two endocardial tubes
primitive ventricle
portion of the primitive heart tube
that eventually forms the left ventricle
pulmonary arteries
left and right branches of the
pulmonary trunk that carry deoxygenated blood
from the heart to each of the lungs
pulmonary capillaries
capillaries surrounding the
alveoli of the lungs where gas exchange occurs:
carbon dioxide exits the blood and oxygen enters
pulmonary circuit
blood flow to and from the lungs
pulmonary trunk
large arterial vessel that carries
blood ejected from the right ventricle; divides into
the left and right pulmonary arteries
pulmonary valve
(also, pulmonary semilunar valve,
the pulmonic valve, or the right semilunar valve)
valve at the base of the pulmonary trunk that
prevents backflow of blood into the right ventricle;
consists of three flaps
pulmonary veins
veins that carry highly oxygenated
blood into the left atrium, which pumps the blood
into the left ventricle, which in turn pumps
oxygenated blood into the aorta and to the many
branches of the systemic circuit
Purkinje fibers
specialized myocardial conduction
fibers that arise from the bundle branches and
spread the impulse to the myocardial contraction
fibers of the ventricles
QRS complex
component of the electrocardiogram
that represents the depolarization of the ventricles
and includes, as a component, the repolarization of
the atria
right atrioventricular valve
(also, tricuspid valve)
valve located between the right atrium and
ventricle; consists of three flaps of tissue
semilunar valves
valves located at the base of the
pulmonary trunk and at the base of the aorta
septum
(plural = septa) walls or partitions that divide
the heart into chambers
septum primum
flap of tissue in the fetus that covers
the foramen ovale within a few seconds after birth
sinoatrial (SA) node
known as the pacemaker, a
specialized clump of myocardial conducting cells
located in the superior portion of the right atrium
that has the highest inherent rate of depolarization
that then spreads throughout the heart
sinus rhythm
normal contractile pattern of the heart
sinus venosus
develops into the posterior portion of
the right atrium, the SA node, and the coronary
sinus
small cardiac vein
parallels the right coronary artery
and drains blood from the posterior surfaces of the
right atrium and ventricle; drains into the coronary
sinus, middle cardiac vein, or right atrium
spontaneous depolarization
(also, prepotential
depolarization) the mechanism that accounts for the
autorhythmic property of cardiac muscle; the
membrane potential increases as sodium ions
diffuse through the always-open sodium ion
channels and causes the electrical potential to rise
stroke volume (SV)
amount of blood pumped by each
ventricle per contraction; also, the difference
between EDV and ESV
sulcus
(plural = sulci) fat-filled groove visible on the
surface of the heart; coronary vessels are also
located in these areas
superior vena cava
large systemic vein that returns
blood to the heart from the superior portion of the
body
systemic circuit
blood flow to and from virtually all of
the tissues of the body
systole
period of time when the heart muscle is
contracting
T wave
component of the electrocardiogram that
represents the repolarization of the ventricles
target heart rate
range in which both the heart and
lungs receive the maximum benefit from an aerobic
workout
trabeculae carneae
ridges of muscle covered by
endocardium located in the ventricles
tricuspid valve
term used most often in clinical
settings for the right atrioventricular valve
truncus arteriosus
portion of the primitive heart that
will eventually divide and give rise to the ascending
aorta and pulmonary trunk
valve
in the cardiovascular system, a specialized
structure located within the heart or vessels that
ensures one-way flow of blood
ventricle
one of the primary pumping chambers of
the heart located in the lower portion of the heart;
the left ventricle is the major pumping chamber on
the lower left side of the heart that ejects blood into
the systemic circuit via the aorta and receives blood
from the left atrium; the right ventricle is the major
pumping chamber on the lower right side of the
heart that ejects blood into the pulmonary circuit via
the pulmonary trunk and receives blood from the
right atrium
ventricular ejection phase
second phase of
804
19 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
ventricular systole during which blood is pumped
from the ventricle
Chapter Review
19.1 Heart Anatomy
The heart resides within the pericardial sac and is
located in the mediastinal space within the thoracic
cavity. The pericardial sac consists of two fused layers:
an outer fibrous capsule and an inner parietal
pericardium lined with a serous membrane. Between
the pericardial sac and the heart is the pericardial
cavity, which is filled with lubricating serous fluid. The
walls of the heart are composed of an outer
epicardium, a thick myocardium, and an inner lining
layer of endocardium. The human heart consists of a
pair of atria, which receive blood and pump it into a
pair of ventricles, which pump blood into the vessels.
The right atrium receives systemic blood relatively low
in oxygen and pumps it into the right ventricle, which
pumps it into the pulmonary circuit. Exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs in the lungs, and
blood high in oxygen returns to the left atrium, which
pumps blood into the left ventricle, which in turn
pumps blood into the aorta and the remainder of the
systemic circuit. The septa are the partitions that
separate the chambers of the heart. They include the
interatrial septum, the interventricular septum, and the
atrioventricular septum. Two of these openings are
guarded by the atrioventricular valves, the right
tricuspid valve and the left mitral valve, which prevent
the backflow of blood. Each is attached to chordae
tendineae that extend to the papillary muscles, which
are extensions of the myocardium, to prevent the
valves from being blown back into the atria. The
pulmonary valve is located at the base of the
pulmonary trunk, and the left semilunar valve is
located at the base of the aorta. The right and left
coronary arteries are the first to branch off the aorta
and arise from two of the three sinuses located near
the base of the aorta and are generally located in the
sulci. Cardiac veins parallel the small cardiac arteries
and generally drain into the coronary sinus.
19.2 Cardiac Muscle and Electrical Activity
The heart is regulated by both neural and endocrine
control, yet it is capable of initiating its own action
potential followed by muscular contraction. The
conductive cells within the heart establish the heart
rate and transmit it through the myocardium. The
contractile cells contract and propel the blood. The
normal path of transmission for the conductive cells is
the sinoatrial (SA) node, internodal pathways,
atrioventricular (AV) node, atrioventricular (AV) bundle
of His, bundle branches, and Purkinje fibers. The action
potential for the conductive cells consists of a
prepotential phase with a slow influx of Na+ followed
by a rapid influx of Ca2+ and outflux of K+. Contractile
cells have an action potential with an extended plateau
phase that results in an extended refractory period to
allow complete contraction for the heart to pump blood
effectively. Recognizable points on the ECG include the
P wave that corresponds to atrial depolarization, the
QRS complex that corresponds to ventricular
depolarization, and the T wave that corresponds to
ventricular repolarization.
19.3 Cardiac Cycle
The cardiac cycle comprises a complete relaxation and
contraction of both the atria and ventricles, and lasts
approximately 0.8 seconds. Beginning with all
chambers in diastole, blood flows passively from the
veins into the atria and past the atrioventricular valves
into the ventricles. The atria begin to contract (atrial
systole), following depolarization of the atria, and
pump blood into the ventricles. The ventricles begin to
contract (ventricular systole), raising pressure within
the ventricles. When ventricular pressure rises above
the pressure in the atria, blood flows toward the atria,
producing the first heart sound, S1 or lub. As pressure
in the ventricles rises above two major arteries, blood
pushes open the two semilunar valves and moves into
the pulmonary trunk and aorta in the ventricular
ejection phase. Following ventricular repolarization, the
ventricles begin to relax (ventricular diastole), and
pressure within the ventricles drops. As ventricular
pressure drops, there is a tendency for blood to flow
back into the atria from the major arteries, producing
the dicrotic notch in the ECG and closing the two
semilunar valves. The second heart sound, S2 or dub,
occurs when the semilunar valves close. When the
pressure falls below that of the atria, blood moves from
the atria into the ventricles, opening the
atrioventricular valves and marking one complete heart
cycle. The valves prevent backflow of blood. Failure of
the valves to operate properly produces turbulent
blood flow within the heart; the resulting heart murmur
can often be heard with a stethoscope.
19.4 Cardiac Physiology
Many factors affect HR and SV, and together, they
contribute to cardiac function. HR is largely determined
and regulated by autonomic stimulation and hormones.
There are several feedback loops that contribute to
maintaining homeostasis dependent upon activity
19 • Chapter Review
805
levels, such as the atrial reflex, which is determined by
venous return.
SV is regulated by autonomic innervation and
hormones, but also by filling time and venous return.
Venous return is determined by activity of the skeletal
muscles, blood volume, and changes in peripheral
circulation. Venous return determines preload and the
atrial reflex. Filling time directly related to HR also
determines preload. Preload then impacts both EDV
and ESV. Autonomic innervation and hormones largely
regulate contractility. Contractility impacts EDV as does
afterload. CO is the product of HR multiplied by SV. SV
is the difference between EDV and ESV.
19.5 Development of the Heart
The heart is the first organ to form and become
functional, emphasizing the importance of transport of
material to and from the developing infant. It originates
about day 18 or 19 from the mesoderm and begins
beating and pumping blood about day 21 or 22. It
forms from the cardiogenic region near the head and is
visible as a prominent heart bulge on the surface of the
embryo. Originally, it consists of a pair of strands called
cardiogenic cords that quickly form a hollow lumen and
are referred to as endocardial tubes. These then fuse
into a single heart tube and differentiate into the
truncus arteriosus, bulbus cordis, primitive ventricle,
primitive atrium, and sinus venosus, starting about day
22. The primitive heart begins to form an S shape
within the pericardium between days 23 and 28. The
internal septa begin to form about day 28, separating
the heart into the atria and ventricles, although the
foramen ovale persists until shortly after birth.
Between weeks five and eight, the atrioventricular
valves form. The semilunar valves form between weeks
five and nine.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/heartvalve) to
observe an echocardiogram of actual heart valves
opening and closing. Although much of the heart
has been “removed” from this gif loop so the
chordae tendineae are not visible, why is their
presence more critical for the atrioventricular
valves (tricuspid and mitral) than the semilunar
(aortic and pulmonary) valves?
Review Questions
2. Which of the following is not important in
preventing backflow of blood?
a.
chordae tendineae
b.
papillary muscles
c.
AV valves
d.
endocardium
3. Which valve separates the left atrium from the left
ventricle?
a.
mitral
b.
tricuspid
c.
pulmonary
d.
aortic
4. Which of the following lists the valves in the order
through which the blood flows from the vena cava
through the heart?
a.
tricuspid, pulmonary semilunar, bicuspid,
aortic semilunar
b.
mitral, pulmonary semilunar, bicuspid, aortic
semilunar
c.
aortic semilunar, pulmonary semilunar,
tricuspid, bicuspid
d.
bicuspid, aortic semilunar, tricuspid,
pulmonary semilunar
5. Which chamber initially receives blood from the
systemic circuit?
a.
left atrium
b.
left ventricle
c.
right atrium
d.
right ventricle
806
19 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
6. The ________ layer secretes chemicals that help to
regulate ionic environments and strength of
contraction and serve as powerful vasoconstrictors.
a.
pericardial sac
b.
endocardium
c.
myocardium
d.
epicardium
7. The myocardium would be the thickest in the
________.
a.
left atrium
b.
left ventricle
c.
right atrium
d.
right ventricle
8. In which septum is it normal to find openings in the
adult?
a.
interatrial septum
b.
interventricular septum
c.
atrioventricular septum
d.
all of the above
9. Which of the following is unique to cardiac muscle
cells?
a.
Only cardiac muscle contains a sarcoplasmic
reticulum.
b.
Only cardiac muscle has gap junctions.
c.
Only cardiac muscle is capable of
autorhythmicity
d.
Only cardiac muscle has a high concentration
of mitochondria.
10. The influx of which ion accounts for the plateau
phase?
a.
sodium
b.
potassium
c.
chloride
d.
calcium
11. Which portion of the ECG corresponds to
repolarization of the atria?
a.
P wave
b.
QRS complex
c.
T wave
d.
none of the above: atrial repolarization is
masked by ventricular depolarization
12. Which component of the heart conduction system
would have the slowest rate of firing?
a.
atrioventricular node
b.
atrioventricular bundle
c.
bundle branches
d.
Purkinje fibers
13. The cardiac cycle consists of a distinct relaxation
and contraction phase. Which term is typically
used to refer ventricular contraction while no
blood is being ejected?
a.
systole
b.
diastole
c.
quiescent
d.
isovolumic contraction
14. Most blood enters the ventricle during ________.
a.
atrial systole
b.
atrial diastole
c.
ventricular systole
d.
isovolumic contraction
15. The first heart sound represents which portion of
the cardiac cycle?
a.
atrial systole
b.
ventricular systole
c.
closing of the atrioventricular valves
d.
closing of the semilunar valves
16. Ventricular relaxation immediately follows
________.
a.
atrial depolarization
b.
ventricular repolarization
c.
ventricular depolarization
d.
atrial repolarization
17. The force the heart must overcome to pump blood
is known as ________.
a.
preload
b.
afterload
c.
cardiac output
d.
stroke volume
18. The cardiovascular centers are located in which
area of the brain?
a.
medulla oblongata
b.
pons
c.
mesencephalon (midbrain)
d.
cerebrum
19. In a healthy young adult, what happens to cardiac
output when heart rate increases above 160 bpm?
a.
It increases.
b.
It decreases.
c.
It remains constant.
d.
There is no way to predict.
20. What happens to preload when there is venous
constriction in the veins?
a.
It increases.
b.
It decreases.
c.
It remains constant.
d.
There is no way to predict.
19 • Review Questions
807
21. Which of the following is a positive inotrope?
a.
Na+
b.
K+
c.
Ca2+
d.
both Na+ and K+
22. The earliest organ to form and begin function
within the developing human is the ________.
a.
brain
b.
stomach
c.
lungs
d.
heart
23. Of the three germ layers that give rise to all adult
tissues and organs, which gives rise to the heart?
a.
ectoderm
b.
endoderm
c.
mesoderm
d.
placenta
24. The two tubes that eventually fuse to form the
heart are referred to as the ________.
a.
primitive heart tubes
b.
endocardial tubes
c.
cardiogenic region
d.
cardiogenic tubes
25. Which primitive area of the heart will give rise to
the right ventricle?
a.
bulbus cordis
b.
primitive ventricle
c.
sinus venosus
d.
truncus arteriosus
26. The pulmonary trunk and aorta are derived from
which primitive heart structure?
a.
bulbus cordis
b.
primitive ventricle
c.
sinus venosus
d.
truncus arteriosus
Critical Thinking Questions
27. Describe how the valves keep the blood moving in
one direction.
28. Why is the pressure in the pulmonary circulation
lower than in the systemic circulation?
29. Why is the plateau phase so critical to cardiac
muscle function?
30. How does the delay of the impulse at the
atrioventricular node contribute to cardiac
function?
31. How do gap junctions and intercalated disks aid
contraction of the heart?
32. Why do the cardiac muscles cells demonstrate
autorhythmicity?
33. Describe one cardiac cycle, beginning with both
atria and ventricles relaxed.
34. Why does increasing EDV increase contractility?
35. Why is afterload important to cardiac function?
36. Why is it so important for the human heart to
develop early and begin functioning within the
developing embryo?
37. Describe how the major pumping chambers, the
ventricles, form within the developing heart.
808
19 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 20
The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and
Circulation
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast the anatomical structure of arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins
•
Accurately describe the forces that account for capillary exchange
•
List the major factors affecting blood flow, blood pressure, and resistance
•
Describe how blood flow, blood pressure, and resistance interrelate
•
Discuss how the neural and endocrine mechanisms maintain homeostasis within the blood vessels
•
Describe the interaction of the cardiovascular system with other body systems
•
Label the major blood vessels of the pulmonary and systemic circulations
•
Identify and describe the hepatic portal system
•
Describe the development of blood vessels and fetal circulation
•
Compare fetal circulation to that of an individual after birth
In this chapter, you will learn about the vascular part of the cardiovascular system, that is, the
vessels that transport blood throughout the body and provide the physical site where gases, nutrients, and other
substances are exchanged with body cells. When vessel functioning is reduced, blood-borne substances do not
circulate effectively throughout the body. As a result, tissue injury occurs, metabolism is impaired, and the functions
of every bodily system are threatened.
Figure 20.1
Blood Vessels While most blood vessels are located deep from the surface and are not visible, the superficial veins of the
upper limb provide an indication of the extent, prominence, and importance of these structures to the body. (credit: Colin Davis)
20.1 Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast the three tunics that make up the walls of most blood vessels
•
Distinguish between elastic arteries, muscular arteries, and arterioles on the basis of structure, location, and
function
•
Describe the basic structure of a capillary bed, from the supplying metarteriole to the venule into which it drains
•
Explain the structure and function of venous valves in the large veins of the extremities
Blood is carried through the body via blood vessels. An artery is a blood vessel that carries blood away from the
heart, where it branches into ever-smaller vessels. Eventually, the smallest arteries, vessels called arterioles,
further branch into tiny capillaries, where nutrients and wastes are exchanged, and then combine with other vessels
that exit capillaries to form venules, small blood vessels that carry blood to a vein, a larger blood vessel that returns
blood to the heart.
Arteries and veins transport blood in two distinct circuits: the systemic circuit and the pulmonary circuit (Figure
20.2). Systemic arteries provide blood rich in oxygen to the body’s tissues. The blood returned to the heart through
systemic veins has less oxygen, since much of the oxygen carried by the arteries has been delivered to the cells. In
contrast, in the pulmonary circuit, arteries carry blood low in oxygen exclusively to the lungs for gas exchange.
Pulmonary veins then return freshly oxygenated blood from the lungs to the heart to be pumped back out into
systemic circulation. Although arteries and veins differ structurally and functionally, they share certain features.
FIGURE 20.2
Cardiovascular Circulation
The pulmonary circuit moves blood from the right side of the heart to the lungs and back to
the heart. The systemic circuit moves blood from the left side of the heart to the head and body and returns it to the right side of the heart
to repeat the cycle. The arrows indicate the direction of blood flow, and the colors show the relative levels of oxygen concentration.
Shared Structures
Different types of blood vessels vary slightly in their structures, but they share the same general features. Arteries
and arterioles have thicker walls than veins and venules because they are closer to the heart and receive blood that
is surging at a far greater pressure (Figure 20.3). Each type of vessel has a lumen—a hollow passageway through
which blood flows. Arteries have smaller lumens than veins, a characteristic that helps to maintain the pressure of
blood moving through the system. Together, their thicker walls and smaller diameters give arterial lumens a more
rounded appearance in cross section than the lumens of veins.
810
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.3
Structure of Blood Vessels
(a) Arteries and (b) veins share the same general features, but the walls of arteries are much
thicker because of the higher pressure of the blood that flows through them. (c) A micrograph shows the relative differences in thickness.
LM × 160. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
By the time blood has passed through capillaries and entered venules, the pressure initially exerted upon it by heart
contractions has diminished. In other words, in comparison to arteries, venules and veins withstand a much lower
pressure from the blood that flows through them. Their walls are considerably thinner and their lumens are
correspondingly larger in diameter, allowing more blood to flow with less vessel resistance. In addition, many veins
of the body, particularly those of the limbs, contain valves that assist the unidirectional flow of blood toward the
heart. This is critical because blood flow becomes sluggish in the extremities, as a result of the lower pressure and
the effects of gravity.
The walls of arteries and veins are largely composed of living cells and their products (including collagenous and
elastic fibers); the cells require nourishment and produce waste. Since blood passes through the larger vessels
relatively quickly, there is limited opportunity for blood in the lumen of the vessel to provide nourishment to or
remove waste from the vessel’s cells. Further, the walls of the larger vessels are too thick for nutrients to diffuse
through to all of the cells. Larger arteries and veins contain small blood vessels within their walls known as the vasa
vasorum—literally “vessels of the vessel”—to provide them with this critical exchange. Since the pressure within
arteries is relatively high, the vasa vasorum must function in the outer layers of the vessel (see Figure 20.3) or the
pressure exerted by the blood passing through the vessel would collapse it, preventing any exchange from
occurring. The lower pressure within veins allows the vasa vasorum to be located closer to the lumen. The
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
811
restriction of the vasa vasorum to the outer layers of arteries is thought to be one reason that arterial diseases are
more common than venous diseases, since its location makes it more difficult to nourish the cells of the arteries and
remove waste products. There are also minute nerves within the walls of both types of vessels that control the
contraction and dilation of smooth muscle. These minute nerves are known as the nervi vasorum.
Both arteries and veins have the same three distinct tissue layers, called tunics (from the Latin term tunica), for the
garments first worn by ancient Romans; the term tunic is also used for some modern garments. From the most
interior layer to the outer, these tunics are the tunica intima, the tunica media, and the tunica externa (see Figure
20.3). Table 20.1 compares and contrasts the tunics of the arteries and veins.
Comparison of Tunics in Arteries and Veins
Arteries
Veins
General
appearance
Thick walls with small lumens
Generally appear rounded
Thin walls with large lumens
Generally appear flattened
Tunica
intima
Endothelium usually appears wavy due to constriction of
smooth muscle
Internal elastic membrane present in larger vessels
Endothelium appears smooth
Internal elastic membrane
absent
Tunica
media
Normally the thickest layer in arteries
Smooth muscle cells and elastic fibers predominate (the
proportions of these vary with distance from the heart)
External elastic membrane present in larger vessels
Normally thinner than the
tunica externa
Smooth muscle cells and
collagenous fibers predominate
Nervi vasorum and vasa
vasorum present
External elastic membrane
absent
Tunica
externa
Normally thinner than the tunica media in all but the largest
arteries
Collagenous and elastic fibers
Nervi vasorum and vasa vasorum present
Normally the thickest layer in
veins
Collagenous and smooth fibers
predominate
Some smooth muscle fibers
Nervi vasorum and vasa
vasorum present
TABLE 20.1
Tunica Intima
The tunica intima (also called the tunica interna) is composed of epithelial and connective tissue layers. Lining the
tunica intima is the specialized simple squamous epithelium called the endothelium, which is continuous
throughout the entire vascular system, including the lining of the chambers of the heart. Damage to this endothelial
lining and exposure of blood to the collagenous fibers beneath is one of the primary causes of clot formation. Until
recently, the endothelium was viewed simply as the boundary between the blood in the lumen and the walls of the
vessels. Recent studies, however, have shown that it is physiologically critical to such activities as helping to
regulate capillary exchange and altering blood flow. The endothelium releases local chemicals called endothelins
that can constrict the smooth muscle within the walls of the vessel to increase blood pressure. Uncompensated
overproduction of endothelins may contribute to hypertension (high blood pressure) and cardiovascular disease.
Next to the endothelium is the basement membrane, or basal lamina, that effectively binds the endothelium to the
connective tissue. The basement membrane provides strength while maintaining flexibility, and it is permeable,
812
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
allowing materials to pass through it. The thin outer layer of the tunica intima contains a small amount of areolar
connective tissue that consists primarily of elastic fibers to provide the vessel with additional flexibility; it also
contains some collagenous fibers to provide additional strength.
In larger arteries, there is also a thick, distinct layer of elastic fibers known as the internal elastic membrane (also
called the internal elastic lamina) at the boundary with the tunica media. Like the other components of the tunica
intima, the internal elastic membrane provides structure while allowing the vessel to stretch. It is permeated with
small openings that allow exchange of materials between the tunics. The internal elastic membrane is not apparent
in veins. In addition, many veins, particularly in the lower limbs, contain valves formed by sections of thickened
endothelium that are reinforced with connective tissue, extending into the lumen.
Under the microscope, the lumen and the entire tunica intima of a vein will appear smooth, whereas those of an
artery will normally appear wavy because of the partial constriction of the smooth muscle in the tunica media, the
next layer of blood vessel walls.
Tunica Media
The tunica media is the substantial middle layer of the vessel wall (see Figure 20.3). It is generally the thickest
layer in arteries, and it is much thicker in arteries than it is in veins. The tunica media consists of layers of smooth
muscle supported by connective tissue that is primarily made up of elastic fibers, most of which are arranged in
circular sheets. Toward the outer portion of the tunic, there are also layers of longitudinal muscle. Contraction and
relaxation of the circular muscles decrease and increase the diameter of the vessel lumen, respectively. Specifically
in arteries, vasoconstriction decreases blood flow as the smooth muscle in the walls of the tunica media contracts,
making the lumen narrower and increasing blood pressure. Similarly, vasodilation increases blood flow as the
smooth muscle relaxes, allowing the lumen to widen and blood pressure to drop. Both vasoconstriction and
vasodilation are regulated in part by small vascular nerves, known as nervi vasorum, or “nerves of the vessel,” that
run within the walls of blood vessels. These are generally all sympathetic fibers, although some trigger vasodilation
and others induce vasoconstriction, depending upon the nature of the neurotransmitter and receptors located on
the target cell. Parasympathetic stimulation does trigger vasodilation as well as erection during sexual arousal in the
external genitalia of both sexes. Nervous control over vessels tends to be more generalized than the specific
targeting of individual blood vessels. Local controls, discussed later, account for this phenomenon. (Seek additional
content for more information on these dynamic aspects of the autonomic nervous system.) Hormones and local
chemicals also control blood vessels. Together, these neural and chemical mechanisms reduce or increase blood
flow in response to changing body conditions, from exercise to hydration. Regulation of both blood flow and blood
pressure is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
The smooth muscle layers of the tunica media are supported by a framework of collagenous fibers that also binds
the tunica media to the inner and outer tunics. Along with the collagenous fibers are large numbers of elastic fibers
that appear as wavy lines in prepared slides. Separating the tunica media from the outer tunica externa in larger
arteries is the external elastic membrane (also called the external elastic lamina), which also appears wavy in
slides. This structure is not usually seen in smaller arteries, nor is it seen in veins.
Tunica Externa
The outer tunic, the tunica externa (also called the tunica adventitia), is a substantial sheath of connective tissue
composed primarily of collagenous fibers. Some bands of elastic fibers are found here as well. The tunica externa in
veins also contains groups of smooth muscle fibers. This is normally the thickest tunic in veins and may be thicker
than the tunica media in some larger arteries. The outer layers of the tunica externa are not distinct but rather blend
with the surrounding connective tissue outside the vessel, helping to hold the vessel in relative position. If you are
able to palpate some of the superficial veins on your upper limbs and try to move them, you will find that the tunica
externa prevents this. If the tunica externa did not hold the vessel in place, any movement would likely result in
disruption of blood flow.
Arteries
An artery is a blood vessel that conducts blood away from the heart. All arteries have relatively thick walls that can
withstand the high pressure of blood ejected from the heart. However, those close to the heart have the thickest
walls, containing a high percentage of elastic fibers in all three of their tunics. This type of artery is known as an
elastic artery (Figure 20.4). Vessels larger than 10 mm in diameter are typically elastic. Their abundant elastic
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
813
fibers allow them to expand, as blood pumped from the ventricles passes through them, and then to recoil after the
surge has passed. If artery walls were rigid and unable to expand and recoil, their resistance to blood flow would
greatly increase and blood pressure would rise to even higher levels, which would in turn require the heart to pump
harder to increase the volume of blood expelled by each pump (the stroke volume) and maintain adequate pressure
and flow. Artery walls would have to become even thicker in response to this increased pressure. The elastic recoil
of the vascular wall helps to maintain the pressure gradient that drives the blood through the arterial system. An
elastic artery is also known as a conducting artery, because the large diameter of the lumen enables it to accept a
large volume of blood from the heart and conduct it to smaller branches.
FIGURE 20.4
Types of Arteries and Arterioles
Comparison of the walls of an elastic artery, a muscular artery, and an arteriole is
shown. In terms of scale, the diameter of an arteriole is measured in micrometers compared to millimeters for elastic and muscular
arteries.
Farther from the heart, where the surge of blood has dampened, the percentage of elastic fibers in an artery’s tunica
intima decreases and the amount of smooth muscle in its tunica media increases. The artery at this point is
described as a muscular artery. The diameter of muscular arteries typically ranges from 0.1 mm to 10 mm. Their
thick tunica media allows muscular arteries to play a leading role in vasoconstriction. In contrast, their decreased
quantity of elastic fibers limits their ability to expand. Fortunately, because the blood pressure has eased by the
time it reaches these more distant vessels, elasticity has become less important.
Notice that although the distinctions between elastic and muscular arteries are important, there is no “line of
demarcation” where an elastic artery suddenly becomes muscular. Rather, there is a gradual transition as the
vascular tree repeatedly branches. In turn, muscular arteries branch to distribute blood to the vast network of
arterioles. For this reason, a muscular artery is also known as a distributing artery.
Arterioles
An arteriole is a very small artery that leads to a capillary. Arterioles have the same three tunics as the larger
vessels, but the thickness of each is greatly diminished. The critical endothelial lining of the tunica intima is intact.
The tunica media is restricted to one or two smooth muscle cell layers in thickness. The tunica externa remains but
is very thin (see Figure 20.4).
With a lumen averaging 30 micrometers or less in diameter, arterioles are critical in slowing down—or
resisting—blood flow and, thus, causing a substantial drop in blood pressure. Because of this, you may see them
referred to as resistance vessels. The muscle fibers in arterioles are normally slightly contracted, causing arterioles
to maintain a consistent muscle tone—in this case referred to as vascular tone—in a similar manner to the muscular
tone of skeletal muscle. In reality, all blood vessels exhibit vascular tone due to the partial contraction of smooth
muscle. The importance of the arterioles is that they will be the primary site of both resistance and regulation of
blood pressure. The precise diameter of the lumen of an arteriole at any given moment is determined by neural and
chemical controls, and vasoconstriction and vasodilation in the arterioles are the primary mechanisms for
distribution of blood flow.
Capillaries
A capillary is a microscopic channel that supplies blood to the tissues, a process called perfusion. Exchange of
gases and other substances occurs between the blood in capillaries and the surrounding cells and their tissue fluid
(interstitial fluid). The diameter of a capillary lumen ranges from 5–10 micrometers; the smallest are just barely
wide enough for an erythrocyte to squeeze through. Flow through capillaries is often described as microcirculation.
The wall of a capillary consists of the endothelial layer surrounded by a basement membrane with occasional
814
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
smooth muscle fibers. There is some variation in wall structure: In a large capillary, several endothelial cells
bordering each other may line the lumen; in a small capillary, there may be only a single cell layer that wraps around
to contact itself.
For capillaries to function, their walls must be leaky, allowing substances to pass through. There are three major
types of capillaries, which differ according to their degree of “leakiness:” continuous, fenestrated, and sinusoid
capillaries (Figure 20.5).
Continuous Capillaries
The most common type of capillary, the continuous capillary, is found in almost all vascularized tissues. Continuous
capillaries are characterized by a complete endothelial lining with tight junctions between endothelial cells.
Although a tight junction is usually impermeable and only allows for the passage of water and ions, they are often
incomplete in capillaries, leaving intercellular clefts that allow for exchange of water and other very small molecules
between the blood plasma and the interstitial fluid. Substances that can pass between cells include metabolic
products, such as glucose, water, and small hydrophobic molecules like gases and hormones, as well as various
leukocytes. Continuous capillaries not associated with the brain are rich in transport vesicles, contributing to either
endocytosis or exocytosis. Those in the brain are part of the blood-brain barrier. Here, there are tight junctions and
no intercellular clefts, plus a thick basement membrane and astrocyte extensions called end feet; these structures
combine to prevent the movement of nearly all substances.
FIGURE 20.5
Types of Capillaries
The three major types of capillaries: continuous, fenestrated, and sinusoid.
Fenestrated Capillaries
A fenestrated capillary is one that has pores (or fenestrations) in addition to tight junctions in the endothelial lining.
These make the capillary permeable to larger molecules. The number of fenestrations and their degree of
permeability vary, however, according to their location. Fenestrated capillaries are common in the small intestine,
which is the primary site of nutrient absorption, as well as in the kidneys, which filter the blood. They are also found
in the choroid plexus of the brain and many endocrine structures, including the hypothalamus, pituitary, pineal, and
thyroid glands.
Sinusoid Capillaries
A sinusoid capillary (or sinusoid) is the least common type of capillary. Sinusoid capillaries are flattened, and they
have extensive intercellular gaps and incomplete basement membranes, in addition to intercellular clefts and
fenestrations. This gives them an appearance not unlike Swiss cheese. These very large openings allow for the
passage of the largest molecules, including plasma proteins and even cells. Blood flow through sinusoids is very
slow, allowing more time for exchange of gases, nutrients, and wastes. Sinusoids are found in the liver and spleen,
bone marrow, lymph nodes (where they carry lymph, not blood), and many endocrine glands including the pituitary
and adrenal glands. Without these specialized capillaries, these organs would not be able to provide their myriad of
functions. For example, when bone marrow forms new blood cells, the cells must enter the blood supply and can
only do so through the large openings of a sinusoid capillary; they cannot pass through the small openings of
continuous or fenestrated capillaries. The liver also requires extensive specialized sinusoid capillaries in order to
process the materials brought to it by the hepatic portal vein from both the digestive tract and spleen, and to release
plasma proteins into circulation.
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
815
Metarterioles and Capillary Beds
A metarteriole is a type of vessel that has structural characteristics of both an arteriole and a capillary. Slightly
larger than the typical capillary, the smooth muscle of the tunica media of the metarteriole is not continuous but
forms rings of smooth muscle (sphincters) prior to the entrance to the capillaries. Each metarteriole arises from a
terminal arteriole and branches to supply blood to a capillary bed that may consist of 10–100 capillaries.
The precapillary sphincters, circular smooth muscle cells that surround the capillary at its origin with the
metarteriole, tightly regulate the flow of blood from a metarteriole to the capillaries it supplies. Their function is
critical: If all of the capillary beds in the body were to open simultaneously, they would collectively hold every drop
of blood in the body and there would be none in the arteries, arterioles, venules, veins, or the heart itself. Normally,
the precapillary sphincters are closed. When the surrounding tissues need oxygen and have excess waste products,
the precapillary sphincters open, allowing blood to flow through and exchange to occur before closing once more
(Figure 20.6). If all of the precapillary sphincters in a capillary bed are closed, blood will flow from the metarteriole
directly into a thoroughfare channel and then into the venous circulation, bypassing the capillary bed entirely. This
creates what is known as a vascular shunt. In addition, an arteriovenous anastomosis may bypass the capillary
bed and lead directly to the venous system.
Although you might expect blood flow through a capillary bed to be smooth, in reality, it moves with an irregular,
pulsating flow. This pattern is called vasomotion and is regulated by chemical signals that are triggered in response
to changes in internal conditions, such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen ion, and lactic acid levels. For example,
during strenuous exercise when oxygen levels decrease and carbon dioxide, hydrogen ion, and lactic acid levels all
increase, the capillary beds in skeletal muscle are open, as they would be in the digestive system when nutrients are
present in the digestive tract. During sleep or rest periods, vessels in both areas are largely closed; they open only
occasionally to allow oxygen and nutrient supplies to travel to the tissues to maintain basic life processes.
FIGURE 20.6
Capillary Bed
In a capillary bed, arterioles give rise to metarterioles. Precapillary sphincters located at the junction of a
metarteriole with a capillary regulate blood flow. A thoroughfare channel connects the metarteriole to a venule. An arteriovenous
anastomosis, which directly connects the arteriole with the venule, is shown at the bottom.
Venules
A venule is an extremely small vein, generally 8–100 micrometers in diameter. Postcapillary venules join multiple
capillaries exiting from a capillary bed. Multiple venules join to form veins. The walls of venules consist of
endothelium, a thin middle layer with a few muscle cells and elastic fibers, plus an outer layer of connective tissue
fibers that constitute a very thin tunica externa (Figure 20.7). Venules as well as capillaries are the primary sites of
emigration or diapedesis, in which the white blood cells adhere to the endothelial lining of the vessels and then
squeeze through adjacent cells to enter the tissue fluid.
816
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Veins
A vein is a blood vessel that conducts blood toward the heart. Compared to arteries, veins are thin-walled vessels
with large and irregular lumens (see Figure 20.7). Because they are low-pressure vessels, larger veins are commonly
equipped with valves that promote the unidirectional flow of blood toward the heart and prevent backflow toward
the capillaries caused by the inherent low blood pressure in veins as well as the pull of gravity. Table 20.2 compares
the features of arteries and veins.
FIGURE 20.7
Comparison of Veins and Venules
Many veins have valves to prevent back flow of blood, whereas venules do not. In
terms of scale, the diameter of a venule is measured in micrometers compared to millimeters for veins.
Comparison of Arteries and Veins
Arteries
Veins
Direction of blood flow
Conducts blood away from
the heart
Conducts blood toward the heart
General appearance
Rounded
Irregular, often collapsed
Pressure
High
Low
TABLE 20.2
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
817
Arteries
Veins
Wall thickness
Thick
Thin
Relative oxygen
concentration
Higher in systemic arteries
Lower in pulmonary arteries
Lower in systemic veins
Higher in pulmonary veins
Valves
Not present
Present most commonly in limbs and in veins
inferior to the heart
TABLE 20.2
Disorders of the...
Cardiovascular System: Edema and Varicose Veins
Despite the presence of valves and the contributions of other anatomical and physiological adaptations we will
cover shortly, over the course of a day, some blood will inevitably pool, especially in the lower limbs, due to the
pull of gravity. Any blood that accumulates in a vein will increase the pressure within it, which can then be
reflected back into the smaller veins, venules, and eventually even the capillaries. Increased pressure will
promote the flow of fluids out of the capillaries and into the interstitial fluid. The presence of excess tissue fluid
around the cells leads to a condition called edema.
Most people experience a daily accumulation of tissue fluid, especially if they spend much of their work life on
their feet (like most health professionals). However, clinical edema goes beyond normal swelling and requires
medical treatment. Edema has many potential causes, including hypertension and heart failure, severe protein
deficiency, renal failure, and many others. In order to treat edema, which is a sign rather than a discrete
disorder, the underlying cause must be diagnosed and alleviated.
818
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Veins as Blood Reservoirs
In addition to their primary function of returning blood to the heart, veins may be considered blood reservoirs, since
systemic veins contain approximately 64 percent of the blood volume at any given time (Figure 20.9). Their ability to
hold this much blood is due to their high capacitance, that is, their capacity to distend (expand) readily to store a
high volume of blood, even at a low pressure. The large lumens and relatively thin walls of veins make them far more
distensible than arteries; thus, they are said to be capacitance vessels.
FIGURE 20.8
Varicose Veins
Varicose veins are commonly found in the lower limbs. (credit: Thomas Kriese)
Edema may be accompanied by varicose veins, especially in the superficial veins of the legs (Figure 20.8). This
disorder arises when defective valves allow blood to accumulate within the veins, causing them to distend, twist,
and become visible on the surface of the integument. Varicose veins may occur in all people, but are more
common in females and are often related to pregnancy. More than simple cosmetic blemishes, varicose veins
are often painful and sometimes itchy or throbbing. Without treatment, they tend to grow worse over time. The
use of support hose, as well as elevating the feet and legs whenever possible, may be helpful in alleviating this
condition. Laser surgery and interventional radiologic procedures can reduce the size and severity of varicose
veins. Severe cases may require conventional surgery to remove the damaged vessels. As there are typically
redundant circulation patterns, that is, anastomoses, for the smaller and more superficial veins, removal does
not typically impair the circulation. There is evidence that patients with varicose veins suffer a greater risk of
developing a thrombus or clot.
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
819
FIGURE 20.9
Distribution of Blood Flow
When blood flow needs to be redistributed to other portions of the body, the vasomotor center located in the
medulla oblongata sends sympathetic stimulation to the smooth muscles in the walls of the veins, causing
constriction—or in this case, venoconstriction. Less dramatic than the vasoconstriction seen in smaller arteries and
arterioles, venoconstriction may be likened to a “stiffening” of the vessel wall. This increases pressure on the blood
within the veins, speeding its return to the heart. As you will note in Figure 20.9, approximately 21 percent of the
venous blood is located in venous networks within the liver, bone marrow, and integument. This volume of blood is
referred to as venous reserve. Through venoconstriction, this “reserve” volume of blood can get back to the heart
more quickly for redistribution to other parts of the circulation.
CAREER CONNECTION
Vascular Surgeons and Technicians
Vascular surgery is a specialty in which the physician deals primarily with diseases of the vascular portion of the
cardiovascular system. This includes repair and replacement of diseased or damaged vessels, removal of plaque
from vessels, minimally invasive procedures including the insertion of venous catheters, and traditional surgery.
Following completion of medical school, the physician generally completes a 5-year surgical residency followed by
an additional 1 to 2 years of vascular specialty training. In the United States, most vascular surgeons are members
of the Society of Vascular Surgery.
Vascular technicians are specialists in imaging technologies that provide information on the health of the vascular
system. They may also assist physicians in treating disorders involving the arteries and veins. This profession often
overlaps with cardiovascular technology, which would also include treatments involving the heart. Although
recognized by the American Medical Association, there are currently no licensing requirements for vascular
technicians, and licensing is voluntary. Vascular technicians typically have an Associate’s degree or certificate,
involving 18 months to 2 years of training. The United States Bureau of Labor projects this profession to grow by 29
percent from 2010 to 2020.
820
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/vascsurgery) to learn more about vascular surgery.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/vasctechs) to learn more about vascular technicians.
20.2 Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish between systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, pulse pressure, and mean arterial pressure
•
Describe the clinical measurement of pulse and blood pressure
•
Identify and discuss five variables affecting arterial blood flow and blood pressure
•
Discuss several factors affecting blood flow in the venous system
Blood flow refers to the movement of blood through a vessel, tissue, or organ, and is usually expressed in terms of
volume of blood per unit of time. It is initiated by the contraction of the ventricles of the heart. Ventricular
contraction ejects blood into the major arteries, resulting in flow from regions of higher pressure to regions of lower
pressure, as blood encounters smaller arteries and arterioles, then capillaries, then the venules and veins of the
venous system. This section discusses a number of critical variables that contribute to blood flow throughout the
body. It also discusses the factors that impede or slow blood flow, a phenomenon known as resistance.
As noted earlier, hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted by a fluid due to gravitational pull, usually against the wall
of the container in which it is located. One form of hydrostatic pressure is blood pressure, the force exerted by
blood upon the walls of the blood vessels or the chambers of the heart. Blood pressure may be measured in
capillaries and veins, as well as the vessels of the pulmonary circulation; however, the term blood pressure without
any specific descriptors typically refers to systemic arterial blood pressure—that is, the pressure of blood flowing in
the arteries of the systemic circulation. In clinical practice, this pressure is measured in mm Hg and is usually
obtained using the brachial artery of the arm.
Components of Arterial Blood Pressure
Arterial blood pressure in the larger vessels consists of several distinct components (Figure 20.10): systolic and
diastolic pressures, pulse pressure, and mean arterial pressure.
Systolic and Diastolic Pressures
When systemic arterial blood pressure is measured, it is recorded as a ratio of two numbers (e.g., 120/80 is a
normal adult blood pressure), expressed as systolic pressure over diastolic pressure. The systolic pressure is the
higher value (typically around 120 mm Hg) and reflects the arterial pressure resulting from the ejection of blood
during ventricular contraction, or systole. The diastolic pressure is the lower value (usually about 80 mm Hg) and
represents the arterial pressure of blood during ventricular relaxation, or diastole.
20.2 • Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
821
FIGURE 20.10
Systemic Blood Pressure
The graph shows the components of blood pressure throughout the blood vessels, including
systolic, diastolic, mean arterial, and pulse pressures.
Pulse Pressure
As shown in Figure 20.10, the difference between the systolic pressure and the diastolic pressure is the pulse
pressure. For example, an individual with a systolic pressure of 120 mm Hg and a diastolic pressure of 80 mm Hg
would have a pulse pressure of 40 mmHg.
Generally, a pulse pressure should be at least 25 percent of the systolic pressure. A pulse pressure below this level
is described as low or narrow. This may occur, for example, in patients with a low stroke volume, which may be seen
in congestive heart failure, stenosis of the aortic valve, or significant blood loss following trauma. In contrast, a high
or wide pulse pressure is common in healthy people following strenuous exercise, when their resting pulse pressure
of 30–40 mm Hg may increase temporarily to 100 mm Hg as stroke volume increases. A persistently high pulse
pressure at or above 100 mm Hg may indicate excessive resistance in the arteries and can be caused by a variety of
disorders. Chronic high resting pulse pressures can degrade the heart, brain, and kidneys, and warrant medical
treatment.
Mean Arterial Pressure
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) represents the “average” pressure of blood in the arteries, that is, the average force
driving blood into vessels that serve the tissues. Mean is a statistical concept and is calculated by taking the sum of
the values divided by the number of values. Although complicated to measure directly and complicated to calculate,
MAP can be approximated by adding the diastolic pressure to one-third of the pulse pressure or systolic pressure
minus the diastolic pressure:
In Figure 20.10, this value is approximately 80 + (120 − 80) / 3, or 93.33. Normally, the MAP falls within the range of
70–110 mm Hg. If the value falls below 60 mm Hg for an extended time, blood pressure will not be high enough to
ensure circulation to and through the tissues, which results in ischemia, or insufficient blood flow. A condition
called hypoxia, inadequate oxygenation of tissues, commonly accompanies ischemia. The term hypoxemia refers to
low levels of oxygen in systemic arterial blood. Neurons are especially sensitive to hypoxia and may die or be
damaged if blood flow and oxygen supplies are not quickly restored.
822
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Pulse
After blood is ejected from the heart, elastic fibers in the arteries help maintain a high-pressure gradient as they
expand to accommodate the blood, then recoil. This expansion and recoiling effect, known as the pulse, can be
palpated manually or measured electronically. Although the effect diminishes over distance from the heart,
elements of the systolic and diastolic components of the pulse are still evident down to the level of the arterioles.
Because pulse indicates heart rate, it is measured clinically to provide clues to a patient’s state of health. It is
recorded as beats per minute. Both the rate and the strength of the pulse are important clinically. A high or irregular
pulse rate can be caused by physical activity or other temporary factors, but it may also indicate a heart condition.
The pulse strength indicates the strength of ventricular contraction and cardiac output. If the pulse is strong, then
systolic pressure is high. If it is weak, systolic pressure has fallen, and medical intervention may be warranted.
Pulse can be palpated manually by placing the tips of the fingers across an artery that runs close to the body surface
and pressing lightly. While this procedure is normally performed using the radial artery in the wrist or the common
carotid artery in the neck, any superficial artery that can be palpated may be used (Figure 20.11). Common sites to
find a pulse include temporal and facial arteries in the head, brachial arteries in the upper arm, femoral arteries in
the thigh, popliteal arteries behind the knees, posterior tibial arteries near the medial tarsal regions, and dorsalis
pedis arteries in the feet. A variety of commercial electronic devices are also available to measure pulse.
FIGURE 20.11
Pulse Sites
The pulse is most readily measured at the radial artery, but can be measured at any of the pulse points
shown.
Measurement of Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is one of the critical parameters measured on virtually every patient in every healthcare setting. The
technique used today was developed more than 100 years ago by a pioneering Russian physician, Dr. Nikolai
20.2 • Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
823
Korotkoff. Turbulent blood flow through the vessels can be heard as a soft ticking while measuring blood pressure;
these sounds are known as Korotkoff sounds. The technique of measuring blood pressure requires the use of a
sphygmomanometer (a blood pressure cuff attached to a measuring device) and a stethoscope. The technique is as
follows:
•
The clinician wraps an inflatable cuff tightly around the patient’s arm at about the level of the heart.
•
The clinician squeezes a rubber pump to inject air into the cuff, raising pressure around the artery and
temporarily cutting off blood flow into the patient’s arm.
•
The clinician places the stethoscope on the patient’s antecubital region and, while gradually allowing air within
the cuff to escape, listens for the Korotkoff sounds.
Although there are five recognized Korotkoff sounds, only two are normally recorded. Initially, no sounds are heard
since there is no blood flow through the vessels, but as air pressure drops, the cuff relaxes, and blood flow returns
to the arm. As shown in Figure 20.12, the first sound heard through the stethoscope—the first Korotkoff
sound—indicates systolic pressure. As more air is released from the cuff, blood is able to flow freely through the
brachial artery and all sounds disappear. The point at which the last sound is heard is recorded as the patient’s
diastolic pressure.
FIGURE 20.12
Blood Pressure Measurement
When pressure in a sphygmomanometer cuff is released, a clinician can hear the
Korotkoff sounds. In this graph, a blood pressure tracing is aligned to a measurement of systolic and diastolic pressures.
The majority of hospitals and clinics have automated equipment for measuring blood pressure that work on the
same principles. An even more recent innovation is a small instrument that wraps around a patient’s wrist. The
patient then holds the wrist over the heart while the device measures blood flow and records pressure.
Variables Affecting Blood Flow and Blood Pressure
Five variables influence blood flow and blood pressure:
•
Cardiac output
•
Compliance
•
Volume of the blood
•
Viscosity of the blood
•
Blood vessel length and diameter
Recall that blood moves from higher pressure to lower pressure. It is pumped from the heart into the arteries at high
pressure. If you increase pressure in the arteries (afterload), and cardiac function does not compensate, blood flow
will actually decrease. In the venous system, the opposite relationship is true. Increased pressure in the veins does
not decrease flow as it does in arteries, but actually increases flow. Since pressure in the veins is normally relatively
low, for blood to flow back into the heart, the pressure in the atria during atrial diastole must be even lower. It
normally approaches zero, except when the atria contract (see Figure 20.10).
824
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is the measurement of blood flow from the heart through the ventricles, and is usually measured in
liters per minute. Any factor that causes cardiac output to increase, by elevating heart rate or stroke volume or both,
will elevate blood pressure and promote blood flow. These factors include sympathetic stimulation, the
catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine, thyroid hormones, and increased calcium ion levels. Conversely,
any factor that decreases cardiac output, by decreasing heart rate or stroke volume or both, will decrease arterial
pressure and blood flow. These factors include parasympathetic stimulation, elevated or decreased potassium ion
levels, decreased calcium levels, anoxia, and acidosis.
Compliance
Compliance is the ability of any compartment to expand to accommodate increased content. A metal pipe, for
example, is not compliant, whereas a balloon is. The greater the compliance of an artery, the more effectively it is
able to expand to accommodate surges in blood flow without increased resistance or blood pressure. Veins are
more compliant than arteries and can expand to hold more blood. When vascular disease causes stiffening of
arteries, compliance is reduced and resistance to blood flow is increased. The result is more turbulence, higher
pressure within the vessel, and reduced blood flow. This increases the work of the heart.
A Mathematical Approach to Factors Affecting Blood Flow
Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille was a French physician and physiologist who devised a mathematical equation
describing blood flow and its relationship to known parameters. The same equation also applies to engineering
studies of the flow of fluids. Although understanding the math behind the relationships among the factors affecting
blood flow is not necessary to understand blood flow, it can help solidify an understanding of their relationships.
Please note that even if the equation looks intimidating, breaking it down into its components and following the
relationships will make these relationships clearer, even if you are weak in math. Focus on the three critical
variables: radius (r), vessel length (λ), and viscosity (η).
Poiseuille’s equation:
•
π is the Greek letter pi, used to represent the mathematical constant that is the ratio of a circle’s circumference
to its diameter. It may commonly be represented as 3.14, although the actual number extends to infinity.
•
ΔP represents the difference in pressure.
•
r4 is the radius (one-half of the diameter) of the vessel to the fourth power.
•
η is the Greek letter eta and represents the viscosity of the blood.
•
λ is the Greek letter lambda and represents the length of a blood vessel.
One of several things this equation allows us to do is calculate the resistance in the vascular system. Normally this
value is extremely difficult to measure, but it can be calculated from this known relationship:
If we rearrange this slightly,
Then by substituting Pouseille’s equation for blood flow:
By examining this equation, you can see that there are only three variables: viscosity, vessel length, and radius,
since 8 and π are both constants. The important thing to remember is this: Two of these variables, viscosity and
vessel length, will change slowly in the body. Only one of these factors, the radius, can be changed rapidly by
vasoconstriction and vasodilation, thus dramatically impacting resistance and flow. Further, small changes in the
radius will greatly affect flow, since it is raised to the fourth power in the equation.
We have briefly considered how cardiac output and blood volume impact blood flow and pressure; the next step is
to see how the other variables (contraction, vessel length, and viscosity) articulate with Pouseille’s equation and
20.2 • Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
825
what they can teach us about the impact on blood flow.
Blood Volume
The relationship between blood volume, blood pressure, and blood flow is intuitively obvious. Water may merely
trickle along a creek bed in a dry season, but rush quickly and under great pressure after a heavy rain. Similarly, as
blood volume decreases, pressure and flow decrease. As blood volume increases, pressure and flow increase.
Under normal circumstances, blood volume varies little. Low blood volume, called hypovolemia, may be caused by
bleeding, dehydration, vomiting, severe burns, or some medications used to treat hypertension. It is important to
recognize that other regulatory mechanisms in the body are so effective at maintaining blood pressure that an
individual may be asymptomatic until 10–20 percent of the blood volume has been lost. Treatment typically
includes intravenous fluid replacement.
Hypervolemia, excessive fluid volume, may be caused by retention of water and sodium, as seen in patients with
heart failure, liver cirrhosis, some forms of kidney disease, hyperaldosteronism, and some glucocorticoid steroid
treatments. Restoring homeostasis in these patients depends upon reversing the condition that triggered the
hypervolemia.
Blood Viscosity
Viscosity is the thickness of fluids that affects their ability to flow. Clean water, for example, is less viscous than
mud. The viscosity of blood is directly proportional to resistance and inversely proportional to flow; therefore, any
condition that causes viscosity to increase will also increase resistance and decrease flow. For example, imagine
sipping milk, then a milkshake, through the same size straw. You experience more resistance and therefore less flow
from the milkshake. Conversely, any condition that causes viscosity to decrease (such as when the milkshake melts)
will decrease resistance and increase flow.
Normally the viscosity of blood does not change over short periods of time. The two primary determinants of blood
viscosity are the formed elements and plasma proteins. Since the vast majority of formed elements are
erythrocytes, any condition affecting erythropoiesis, such as polycythemia or anemia, can alter viscosity. Since most
plasma proteins are produced by the liver, any condition affecting liver function can also change the viscosity slightly
and therefore alter blood flow. Liver abnormalities such as hepatitis, cirrhosis, alcohol damage, and drug toxicities
result in decreased levels of plasma proteins, which decrease blood viscosity. While leukocytes and platelets are
normally a small component of the formed elements, there are some rare conditions in which severe overproduction
can impact viscosity as well.
Vessel Length and Diameter
The length of a vessel is directly proportional to its resistance: the longer the vessel, the greater the resistance and
the lower the flow. As with blood volume, this makes intuitive sense, since the increased surface area of the vessel
will impede the flow of blood. Likewise, if the vessel is shortened, the resistance will decrease and flow will
increase.
The length of our blood vessels increases throughout childhood as we grow, of course, but is unchanging in adults
under normal physiological circumstances. Further, the distribution of vessels is not the same in all tissues. Adipose
tissue does not have an extensive vascular supply. One pound of adipose tissue contains approximately 200 miles of
vessels, whereas skeletal muscle contains more than twice that. Overall, vessels decrease in length only during loss
of mass or amputation. An individual weighing 150 pounds has approximately 60,000 miles of vessels in the body.
Gaining about 10 pounds adds from 2000 to 4000 miles of vessels, depending upon the nature of the gained tissue.
One of the great benefits of weight reduction is the reduced stress to the heart, which does not have to overcome
the resistance of as many miles of vessels.
In contrast to length, the diameter of blood vessels changes throughout the body, according to the type of vessel, as
we discussed earlier. The diameter of any given vessel may also change frequently throughout the day in response
to neural and chemical signals that trigger vasodilation and vasoconstriction. The vascular tone of the vessel is the
contractile state of the smooth muscle and the primary determinant of diameter, and thus of resistance and flow.
The effect of vessel diameter on resistance is inverse: Given the same volume of blood, an increased diameter
means there is less blood contacting the vessel wall, thus lower friction and lower resistance, subsequently
increasing flow. A decreased diameter means more of the blood contacts the vessel wall, and resistance increases,
826
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
subsequently decreasing flow.
The influence of lumen diameter on resistance is dramatic: A slight increase or decrease in diameter causes a huge
decrease or increase in resistance. This is because resistance is inversely proportional to the radius of the blood
vessel (one-half of the vessel’s diameter) raised to the fourth power (R = 1/r4). This means, for example, that if an
artery or arteriole constricts to one-half of its original radius, the resistance to flow will increase 16 times. And if an
artery or arteriole dilates to twice its initial radius, then resistance in the vessel will decrease to 1/16 of its original
value and flow will increase 16 times.
The Roles of Vessel Diameter and Total Area in Blood Flow and Blood Pressure
Recall that we classified arterioles as resistance vessels, because given their small lumen, they dramatically slow
the flow of blood from arteries. In fact, arterioles are the site of greatest resistance in the entire vascular network.
This may seem surprising, given that capillaries have a smaller size. How can this phenomenon be explained?
Figure 20.13 compares vessel diameter, total cross-sectional area, average blood pressure, and blood velocity
through the systemic vessels. Notice in parts (a) and (b) that the total cross-sectional area of the body’s capillary
beds is far greater than any other type of vessel. Although the diameter of an individual capillary is significantly
smaller than the diameter of an arteriole, there are vastly more capillaries in the body than there are other types of
blood vessels. Part (c) shows that blood pressure drops unevenly as blood travels from arteries to arterioles,
capillaries, venules, and veins, and encounters greater resistance. However, the site of the most precipitous drop,
and the site of greatest resistance, is the arterioles. This explains why vasodilation and vasoconstriction of arterioles
play more significant roles in regulating blood pressure than do the vasodilation and vasoconstriction of other
vessels.
Part (d) shows that the velocity (speed) of blood flow decreases dramatically as the blood moves from arteries to
arterioles to capillaries. This slow flow rate allows more time for exchange processes to occur. As blood flows
through the veins, the rate of velocity increases, as blood is returned to the heart.
FIGURE 20.13
Relationships among Vessels in the Systemic Circuit
The relationships among blood vessels that can be compared
include (a) vessel diameter, (b) total cross-sectional area, (c) average blood pressure, and (d) velocity of blood flow.
20.2 • Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
827
Disorders of the...
Cardiovascular System: Arteriosclerosis
Compliance allows an artery to expand when blood is pumped through it from the heart, and then to recoil after
the surge has passed. This helps promote blood flow. In arteriosclerosis, compliance is reduced, and pressure
and resistance within the vessel increase. This is a leading cause of hypertension and coronary heart disease, as
it causes the heart to work harder to generate a pressure great enough to overcome the resistance.
Arteriosclerosis begins with injury to the endothelium of an artery, which may be caused by irritation from high
blood glucose, infection, tobacco use, excessive blood lipids, and other factors. Artery walls that are constantly
stressed by blood flowing at high pressure are also more likely to be injured—which means that hypertension
can promote arteriosclerosis, as well as result from it.
Recall that tissue injury causes inflammation. As inflammation spreads into the artery wall, it weakens and scars
it, leaving it stiff (sclerotic). As a result, compliance is reduced. Moreover, circulating triglycerides and
cholesterol can seep between the damaged lining cells and become trapped within the artery wall, where they
are frequently joined by leukocytes, calcium, and cellular debris. Eventually, this buildup, called plaque, can
narrow arteries enough to impair blood flow. The term for this condition, atherosclerosis (athero- = “porridge”)
describes the mealy deposits (Figure 20.14).
FIGURE 20.14
Atherosclerosis
(a) Atherosclerosis can result from plaques formed by the buildup of fatty, calcified deposits in an
artery. (b) Plaques can also take other forms, as shown in this micrograph of a coronary artery that has a buildup of connective tissue
within the artery wall. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Sometimes a plaque can rupture, causing microscopic tears in the artery wall that allow blood to leak into the
tissue on the other side. When this happens, platelets rush to the site to clot the blood. This clot can further
obstruct the artery and—if it occurs in a coronary or cerebral artery—cause a sudden heart attack or stroke.
Alternatively, plaque can break off and travel through the bloodstream as an embolus until it blocks a more
distant, smaller artery.
Even without total blockage, vessel narrowing leads to ischemia—reduced blood flow—to the tissue region
“downstream” of the narrowed vessel. Ischemia in turn leads to hypoxia—decreased supply of oxygen to the
tissues. Hypoxia involving cardiac muscle or brain tissue can lead to cell death and severe impairment of brain or
heart function.
A major risk factor for both arteriosclerosis and atherosclerosis is advanced age, as the conditions tend to
progress over time. Arteriosclerosis is normally defined as the more generalized loss of compliance, “hardening
of the arteries,” whereas atherosclerosis is a more specific term for the build-up of plaque in the walls of the
vessel and is a specific type of arteriosclerosis. There is also a distinct genetic component, and pre-existing
828
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Venous System
The pumping action of the heart propels the blood into the arteries, from an area of higher pressure toward an area
of lower pressure. If blood is to flow from the veins back into the heart, the pressure in the veins must be greater
than the pressure in the atria of the heart. Two factors help maintain this pressure gradient between the veins and
the heart. First, the pressure in the atria during diastole is very low, often approaching zero when the atria are
relaxed (atrial diastole). Second, two physiologic “pumps” increase pressure in the venous system. The use of the
term “pump” implies a physical device that speeds flow. These physiological pumps are less obvious.
Skeletal Muscle Pump
In many body regions, the pressure within the veins can be increased by the contraction of the surrounding skeletal
muscle. This mechanism, known as the skeletal muscle pump (Figure 20.15), helps the lower-pressure veins
counteract the force of gravity, increasing pressure to move blood back to the heart. As leg muscles contract, for
example during walking or running, they exert pressure on nearby veins with their numerous one-way valves. This
increased pressure causes blood to flow upward, opening valves superior to the contracting muscles so blood flows
through. Simultaneously, valves inferior to the contracting muscles close; thus, blood should not seep back
downward toward the feet. Military recruits are trained to flex their legs slightly while standing at attention for
prolonged periods. Failure to do so may allow blood to pool in the lower limbs rather than returning to the heart.
Consequently, the brain will not receive enough oxygenated blood, and the individual may lose consciousness.
FIGURE 20.15
Skeletal Muscle Pump
The contraction of skeletal muscles surrounding a vein compresses the blood and increases the
pressure in that area. This action forces blood closer to the heart where venous pressure is lower. Note the importance of the one-way
hypertension and/or diabetes also greatly increase the risk. However, obesity, poor nutrition, lack of physical
activity, and tobacco use all are major risk factors.
Treatment includes lifestyle changes, such as weight loss, smoking cessation, regular exercise, and adoption of
a diet low in sodium and saturated fats. Medications to reduce cholesterol and blood pressure may be
prescribed. For blocked coronary arteries, surgery is warranted. In angioplasty, a catheter is inserted into the
vessel at the point of narrowing, and a second catheter with a balloon-like tip is inflated to widen the opening. To
prevent subsequent collapse of the vessel, a small mesh tube called a stent is often inserted. In an
endarterectomy, plaque is surgically removed from the walls of a vessel. This operation is typically performed on
the carotid arteries of the neck, which are a prime source of oxygenated blood for the brain. In a coronary
bypass procedure, a non-vital superficial vessel from another part of the body (often the great saphenous vein)
or a synthetic vessel is inserted to create a path around the blocked area of a coronary artery.
20.2 • Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
829
valves to assure that blood flows only in the proper direction.
Respiratory Pump
The respiratory pump aids blood flow through the veins of the thorax and abdomen. During inhalation, the volume
of the thorax increases, largely through the contraction of the diaphragm, which moves downward and compresses
the abdominal cavity. The elevation of the chest caused by the contraction of the external intercostal muscles also
contributes to the increased volume of the thorax. The volume increase causes air pressure within the thorax to
decrease, allowing us to inhale. Additionally, as air pressure within the thorax drops, blood pressure in the thoracic
veins also decreases, falling below the pressure in the abdominal veins. This causes blood to flow along its pressure
gradient from veins outside the thorax, where pressure is higher, into the thoracic region, where pressure is now
lower. This in turn promotes the return of blood from the thoracic veins to the atria. During exhalation, when air
pressure increases within the thoracic cavity, pressure in the thoracic veins increases, speeding blood flow into the
heart while valves in the veins prevent blood from flowing backward from the thoracic and abdominal veins.
Pressure Relationships in the Venous System
Although vessel diameter increases from the smaller venules to the larger veins and eventually to the venae cavae
(singular = vena cava), the total cross-sectional area actually decreases (see Figure 20.15a and b). The individual
veins are larger in diameter than the venules, but their total number is much lower, so their total cross-sectional
area is also lower.
Also notice that, as blood moves from venules to veins, the average blood pressure drops (see Figure 20.15c), but
the blood velocity actually increases (see Figure 20.15). This pressure gradient drives blood back toward the heart.
Again, the presence of one-way valves and the skeletal muscle and respiratory pumps contribute to this increased
flow. Since approximately 64 percent of the total blood volume resides in systemic veins, any action that increases
the flow of blood through the veins will increase venous return to the heart. Maintaining vascular tone within the
veins prevents the veins from merely distending, dampening the flow of blood, and as you will see, vasoconstriction
actually enhances the flow.
The Role of Venoconstriction in Resistance, Blood Pressure, and Flow
As previously discussed, vasoconstriction of an artery or arteriole decreases the radius, increasing resistance and
pressure, but decreasing flow. Venoconstriction, on the other hand, has a very different outcome. The walls of veins
are thin but irregular; thus, when the smooth muscle in those walls constricts, the lumen becomes more rounded.
The more rounded the lumen, the less surface area the blood encounters, and the less resistance the vessel offers.
Vasoconstriction increases pressure within a vein as it does in an artery, but in veins, the increased pressure
increases flow. Recall that the pressure in the atria, into which the venous blood will flow, is very low, approaching
zero for at least part of the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle. Thus, venoconstriction increases the return of
blood to the heart. Another way of stating this is that venoconstriction increases the preload or stretch of the cardiac
muscle and increases contraction.
20.3 Capillary Exchange
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the primary mechanisms of capillary exchange
•
Distinguish between capillary hydrostatic pressure and blood colloid osmotic pressure, explaining the
contribution of each to net filtration pressure
•
Compare filtration and reabsorption
•
Explain the fate of fluid that is not reabsorbed from the tissues into the vascular capillaries
The primary purpose of the cardiovascular system is to circulate gases, nutrients, wastes, and other substances to
and from the cells of the body. Small molecules, such as gases, lipids, and lipid-soluble molecules, can diffuse
directly through the membranes of the endothelial cells of the capillary wall. Glucose, amino acids, and
ions—including sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride—use transporters to move through specific channels in
the membrane by facilitated diffusion. Glucose, ions, and larger molecules may also leave the blood through
intercellular clefts. Larger molecules can pass through the pores of fenestrated capillaries, and even large plasma
proteins can pass through the great gaps in the sinusoids. Some large proteins in blood plasma can move into and
830
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
out of the endothelial cells packaged within vesicles by endocytosis and exocytosis. Water moves by osmosis.
Bulk Flow
The mass movement of fluids into and out of capillary beds requires a transport mechanism far more efficient than
mere diffusion. This movement, often referred to as bulk flow, involves two pressure-driven mechanisms: Volumes
of fluid move from an area of higher pressure in a capillary bed to an area of lower pressure in the tissues via
filtration. In contrast, the movement of fluid from an area of higher pressure in the tissues into an area of lower
pressure in the capillaries is reabsorption. Two types of pressure interact to drive each of these movements:
hydrostatic pressure and osmotic pressure.
Hydrostatic Pressure
The primary force driving fluid transport between the capillaries and tissues is hydrostatic pressure, which can be
defined as the pressure of any fluid enclosed in a space. Blood hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted by the
blood confined within blood vessels or heart chambers. Even more specifically, the pressure exerted by blood
against the wall of a capillary is called capillary hydrostatic pressure (CHP), and is the same as capillary blood
pressure. CHP is the force that drives fluid out of capillaries and into the tissues.
As fluid exits a capillary and moves into tissues, the hydrostatic pressure in the interstitial fluid correspondingly
rises. This opposing hydrostatic pressure is called the interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure (IFHP). Generally, the
CHP originating from the arterial pathways is considerably higher than the IFHP, because lymphatic vessels are
continually absorbing excess fluid from the tissues. Thus, fluid generally moves out of the capillary and into the
interstitial fluid. This process is called filtration.
Osmotic Pressure
The net pressure that drives reabsorption—the movement of fluid from the interstitial fluid back into the
capillaries—is called osmotic pressure (sometimes referred to as oncotic pressure). Whereas hydrostatic pressure
forces fluid out of the capillary, osmotic pressure draws fluid back in. Osmotic pressure is determined by osmotic
concentration gradients, that is, the difference in the solute-to-water concentrations in the blood and tissue fluid. A
region higher in solute concentration (and lower in water concentration) draws water across a semipermeable
membrane from a region higher in water concentration (and lower in solute concentration).
As we discuss osmotic pressure in blood and tissue fluid, it is important to recognize that the formed elements of
blood do not contribute to osmotic concentration gradients. Rather, it is the plasma proteins that play the key role.
Solutes also move across the capillary wall according to their concentration gradient, but overall, the concentrations
should be similar and not have a significant impact on osmosis. Because of their large size and chemical structure,
plasma proteins are not truly solutes, that is, they do not dissolve but are dispersed or suspended in their fluid
medium, forming a colloid rather than a solution.
The pressure created by the concentration of colloidal proteins in the blood is called the blood colloidal osmotic
pressure (BCOP). Its effect on capillary exchange accounts for the reabsorption of water. The plasma proteins
suspended in blood cannot move across the semipermeable capillary cell membrane, and so they remain in the
plasma. As a result, blood has a higher colloidal concentration and lower water concentration than tissue fluid. It
therefore attracts water. We can also say that the BCOP is higher than the interstitial fluid colloidal osmotic
pressure (IFCOP), which is always very low because interstitial fluid contains few proteins. Thus, water is drawn
from the tissue fluid back into the capillary, carrying dissolved molecules with it. This difference in colloidal osmotic
pressure accounts for reabsorption.
Interaction of Hydrostatic and Osmotic Pressures
The normal unit used to express pressures within the cardiovascular system is millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
When blood leaving an arteriole first enters a capillary bed, the CHP is quite high—about 35 mm Hg. Gradually, this
initial CHP declines as the blood moves through the capillary so that by the time the blood has reached the venous
end, the CHP has dropped to approximately 18 mm Hg. In comparison, the plasma proteins remain suspended in
the blood, so the BCOP remains fairly constant at about 25 mm Hg throughout the length of the capillary and
considerably above the osmotic pressure in the interstitial fluid.
The net filtration pressure (NFP) represents the interaction of the hydrostatic and osmotic pressures, driving fluid
20.3 • Capillary Exchange
831
out of the capillary. It is equal to the difference between the CHP and the BCOP. Since filtration is, by definition, the
movement of fluid out of the capillary, when reabsorption is occurring, the NFP is a negative number.
NFP changes at different points in a capillary bed (Figure 20.16). Close to the arterial end of the capillary, it is
approximately 10 mm Hg, because the CHP of 35 mm Hg minus the BCOP of 25 mm Hg equals 10 mm Hg. Recall
that the hydrostatic and osmotic pressures of the interstitial fluid are essentially negligible. Thus, the NFP of 10 mm
Hg drives a net movement of fluid out of the capillary at the arterial end. At approximately the middle of the
capillary, the CHP is about the same as the BCOP of 25 mm Hg, so the NFP drops to zero. At this point, there is no
net change of volume: Fluid moves out of the capillary at the same rate as it moves into the capillary. Near the
venous end of the capillary, the CHP has dwindled to about 18 mm Hg due to loss of fluid. Because the BCOP
remains steady at 25 mm Hg, water is drawn into the capillary, that is, reabsorption occurs. Another way of
expressing this is to say that at the venous end of the capillary, there is an NFP of −7 mm Hg.
FIGURE 20.16
Capillary Exchange
Net filtration occurs near the arterial end of the capillary since capillary hydrostatic pressure (CHP)
is greater than blood colloidal osmotic pressure (BCOP). There is no net movement of fluid near the midpoint since CHP = BCOP. Net
reabsorption occurs near the venous end since BCOP is greater than CHP.
The Role of Lymphatic Capillaries
Since overall CHP is higher than BCOP, it is inevitable that more net fluid will exit the capillary through filtration at
the arterial end than enters through reabsorption at the venous end. Considering all capillaries over the course of a
day, this can be quite a substantial amount of fluid: Approximately 24 liters per day are filtered, whereas 20.4 liters
are reabsorbed. This excess fluid is picked up by capillaries of the lymphatic system. These extremely thin-walled
vessels have copious numbers of valves that ensure unidirectional flow through ever-larger lymphatic vessels that
eventually drain into the subclavian veins in the neck. An important function of the lymphatic system is to return the
fluid (lymph) to the blood. Lymph may be thought of as recycled blood plasma. (Seek additional content for more
detail on the lymphatic system.)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/capillaryfunct) to explore capillaries and how they function in the body.
Capillaries are never more than 100 micrometers away. What is the main component of interstitial fluid?
20.4 Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the mechanisms involved in the neural regulation of vascular homeostasis
•
Describe the contribution of a variety of hormones to the renal regulation of blood pressure
•
Identify the effects of exercise on vascular homeostasis
•
Discuss how hypertension, hemorrhage, and circulatory shock affect vascular health
In order to maintain homeostasis in the cardiovascular system and provide adequate blood to the tissues, blood
832
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
flow must be redirected continually to the tissues as they become more active. In a very real sense, the
cardiovascular system engages in resource allocation, because there is not enough blood flow to distribute blood
equally to all tissues simultaneously. For example, when an individual is exercising, more blood will be directed to
skeletal muscles, the heart, and the lungs. Following a meal, more blood is directed to the digestive system. Only
the brain receives a more or less constant supply of blood whether you are active, resting, thinking, or engaged in
any other activity.
Table 20.3 provides the distribution of systemic blood at rest and during exercise. Although most of the data
appears logical, the values for the distribution of blood to the integument may seem surprising. During exercise, the
body distributes more blood to the body surface where it can dissipate the excess heat generated by increased
activity into the environment.
Systemic Blood Flow During Rest, Mild Exercise, and Maximal Exercise in a Healthy Young Individual
Organ
Resting
(mL/min)
Mild exercise
(mL/min)
Maximal exercise
(mL/min)
Skeletal muscle
1200
4500
12,500
Heart
250
350
750
Brain
750
750
750
Integument
500
1500
1900
Kidney
1100
900
600
Gastrointestinal
1400
1100
600
Others
(i.e., liver, spleen)
600
400
400
Total
5800
9500
17,500
TABLE 20.3
Three homeostatic mechanisms ensure adequate blood flow, blood pressure, distribution, and ultimately perfusion:
neural, endocrine, and autoregulatory mechanisms. They are summarized in Figure 20.17.
20.4 • Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
833
FIGURE 20.17
Summary of Factors Maintaining Vascular Homeostasis
Adequate blood flow, blood pressure, distribution, and
perfusion involve autoregulatory, neural, and endocrine mechanisms.
Neural Regulation
The nervous system plays a critical role in the regulation of vascular homeostasis. The primary regulatory sites
include the cardiovascular centers in the brain that control both cardiac and vascular functions. In addition, more
generalized neural responses from the limbic system and the autonomic nervous system are factors.
The Cardiovascular Centers in the Brain
Neurological regulation of blood pressure and flow depends on the cardiovascular centers located in the medulla
oblongata. This cluster of neurons responds to changes in blood pressure as well as blood concentrations of oxygen,
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen ions. The cardiovascular center contains three distinct paired components:
834
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
•
The cardioaccelerator centers stimulate cardiac function by regulating heart rate and stroke volume via
sympathetic stimulation from the cardiac accelerator nerve.
•
The cardioinhibitor centers slow cardiac function by decreasing heart rate and stroke volume via
parasympathetic stimulation from the vagus nerve.
•
The vasomotor centers control vessel tone or contraction of the smooth muscle in the tunica media. Changes in
diameter affect peripheral resistance, pressure, and flow, which affect cardiac output. The majority of these
neurons act via the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine from sympathetic neurons.
Although each center functions independently, they are not anatomically distinct.
There is also a small population of neurons that control vasodilation in the vessels of the brain and skeletal muscles
by relaxing the smooth muscle fibers in the vessel tunics. Many of these are cholinergic neurons, that is, they
release acetylcholine, which in turn stimulates the vessels’ endothelial cells to release nitric oxide (NO), which
causes vasodilation. Others release norepinephrine that binds to β2 receptors. A few neurons release NO directly as
a neurotransmitter.
Recall that mild stimulation of the skeletal muscles maintains muscle tone. A similar phenomenon occurs with
vascular tone in vessels. As noted earlier, arterioles are normally partially constricted: With maximal stimulation,
their radius may be reduced to one-half of the resting state. Full dilation of most arterioles requires that this
sympathetic stimulation be suppressed. When it is, an arteriole can expand by as much as 150 percent. Such a
significant increase can dramatically affect resistance, pressure, and flow.
Baroreceptor Reflexes
Baroreceptors are specialized stretch receptors located within thin areas of blood vessels and heart chambers that
respond to the degree of stretch caused by the presence of blood. They send impulses to the cardiovascular center
to regulate blood pressure. Vascular baroreceptors are found primarily in sinuses (small cavities) within the aorta
and carotid arteries: The aortic sinuses are found in the walls of the ascending aorta just superior to the aortic
valve, whereas the carotid sinuses are in the base of the internal carotid arteries. There are also low-pressure
baroreceptors located in the walls of the venae cavae and right atrium.
When blood pressure increases, the baroreceptors are stretched more tightly and initiate action potentials at a
higher rate. At lower blood pressures, the degree of stretch is lower and the rate of firing is slower. When the
cardiovascular center in the medulla oblongata receives this input, it triggers a reflex that maintains homeostasis
(Figure 20.18):
•
When blood pressure rises too high, the baroreceptors fire at a higher rate and trigger parasympathetic
stimulation of the heart. As a result, cardiac output falls. Sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral arterioles
will also decrease, resulting in vasodilation. Combined, these activities cause blood pressure to fall.
•
When blood pressure drops too low, the rate of baroreceptor firing decreases. This will trigger an increase in
sympathetic stimulation of the heart, causing cardiac output to increase. It will also trigger sympathetic
stimulation of the peripheral vessels, resulting in vasoconstriction. Combined, these activities cause blood
pressure to rise.
20.4 • Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
835
FIGURE 20.18
Baroreceptor Reflexes for Maintaining Vascular Homeostasis
Increased blood pressure results in increased rates of
baroreceptor firing, whereas decreased blood pressure results in slower rates of fire, both initiating the homeostatic mechanism to restore
blood pressure.
The baroreceptors in the venae cavae and right atrium monitor blood pressure as the blood returns to the heart from
the systemic circulation. Normally, blood flow into the aorta is the same as blood flow back into the right atrium. If
blood is returning to the right atrium more rapidly than it is being ejected from the left ventricle, the atrial receptors
will stimulate the cardiovascular centers to increase sympathetic firing and increase cardiac output until
homeostasis is achieved. The opposite is also true. This mechanism is referred to as the atrial reflex.
Chemoreceptor Reflexes
In addition to the baroreceptors are chemoreceptors that monitor levels of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen
ions (pH), and thereby contribute to vascular homeostasis. Chemoreceptors monitoring the blood are located in
close proximity to the baroreceptors in the aortic and carotid sinuses. They signal the cardiovascular center as well
as the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata.
Since tissues consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide and acids as waste products, when the body is more
active, oxygen levels fall and carbon dioxide levels rise as cells undergo cellular respiration to meet the energy
needs of activities. This causes more hydrogen ions to be produced, causing the blood pH to drop. When the body is
resting, oxygen levels are higher, carbon dioxide levels are lower, more hydrogen is bound, and pH rises. (Seek
additional content for more detail about pH.)
The chemoreceptors respond to increasing carbon dioxide and hydrogen ion levels (falling pH) by stimulating the
cardioaccelerator and vasomotor centers, increasing cardiac output and constricting peripheral vessels. The
cardioinhibitor centers are suppressed. With falling carbon dioxide and hydrogen ion levels (increasing pH), the
cardioinhibitor centers are stimulated, and the cardioaccelerator and vasomotor centers are suppressed, decreasing
cardiac output and causing peripheral vasodilation. In order to maintain adequate supplies of oxygen to the cells
and remove waste products such as carbon dioxide, it is essential that the respiratory system respond to changing
metabolic demands. In turn, the cardiovascular system will transport these gases to the lungs for exchange, again in
accordance with metabolic demands. This interrelationship of cardiovascular and respiratory control cannot be
overemphasized.
Other neural mechanisms can also have a significant impact on cardiovascular function. These include the limbic
836
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
system that links physiological responses to psychological stimuli, as well as generalized sympathetic and
parasympathetic stimulation.
Endocrine Regulation
Endocrine control over the cardiovascular system involves the catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine, as
well as several hormones that interact with the kidneys in the regulation of blood volume.
Epinephrine and Norepinephrine
The catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine are released by the adrenal medulla, and enhance and extend
the body’s sympathetic or “fight-or-flight” response (see Figure 20.17). They increase heart rate and force of
contraction, while temporarily constricting blood vessels to organs not essential for flight-or-fight responses and
redirecting blood flow to the liver, muscles, and heart.
Antidiuretic Hormone
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as vasopressin, is secreted by the cells in the hypothalamus and
transported via the hypothalamic-hypophyseal tracts to the posterior pituitary where it is stored until released upon
nervous stimulation. The primary trigger prompting the hypothalamus to release ADH is increasing osmolarity of
tissue fluid, usually in response to significant loss of blood volume. ADH signals its target cells in the kidneys to
reabsorb more water, thus preventing the loss of additional fluid in the urine. This will increase overall fluid levels
and help restore blood volume and pressure. In addition, ADH constricts peripheral vessels.
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone Mechanism
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism has a major effect upon the cardiovascular system (Figure 20.19).
Renin is an enzyme, although because of its importance in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway, some
sources identify it as a hormone. Specialized cells in the kidneys , called juxtaglomerular (JG) cells, respond to
decreased blood pressure by secreting renin into the blood. Renin converts the plasma protein angiotensinogen,
which is produced by the liver, into its active form—angiotensin I. Angiotensin I circulates in the blood and is then
converted into angiotensin II in the lungs. This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE).
Angiotensin II is a powerful vasoconstrictor, greatly increasing blood pressure. It also stimulates the release of ADH
and aldosterone, a hormone produced by the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of sodium into
the blood by the kidneys. Since water follows sodium, this increases the reabsorption of water. This in turn increases
blood volume, raising blood pressure. Angiotensin II also stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus, so an
individual will likely consume more fluids, again increasing blood volume and pressure.
FIGURE 20.19
Hormones Involved in Renal Control of Blood Pressure
In the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism, increasing
angiotensin II will stimulate the production of antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone. In addition to renin, the kidneys produce
erythropoietin, which stimulates the production of red blood cells, further increasing blood volume.
Erythropoietin
Erythropoietin (EPO) is released by the kidneys when blood flow and/or oxygen levels decrease. EPO stimulates the
20.4 • Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
837
production of erythrocytes within the bone marrow. Erythrocytes are the major formed element of the blood and
may contribute 40 percent or more to blood volume, a significant factor of viscosity, resistance, pressure, and flow.
In addition, EPO is a vasoconstrictor. Overproduction of EPO or excessive intake of synthetic EPO, often to enhance
athletic performance, will increase viscosity, resistance, and pressure, and decrease flow in addition to its
contribution as a vasoconstrictor.
Atrial Natriuretic Hormone
Secreted by cells in the atria of the heart, atrial natriuretic hormone (ANH) (also known as atrial natriuretic peptide)
is secreted when blood volume is high enough to cause extreme stretching of the cardiac cells. Cells in the ventricle
produce a hormone with similar effects, called B-type natriuretic hormone. Natriuretic hormones are antagonists to
angiotensin II. They promote loss of sodium and water from the kidneys, and suppress renin, aldosterone, and ADH
production and release. All of these actions promote loss of fluid from the body, so blood volume and blood
pressure drop.
Autoregulation of Perfusion
As the name would suggest, autoregulation mechanisms require neither specialized nervous stimulation nor
endocrine control. Rather, these are local, self-regulatory mechanisms that allow each region of tissue to adjust its
blood flow—and thus its perfusion. These local mechanisms include chemical signals and myogenic controls.
Chemical Signals Involved in Autoregulation
Chemical signals work at the level of the precapillary sphincters to trigger either constriction or relaxation. As you
know, opening a precapillary sphincter allows blood to flow into that particular capillary, whereas constricting a
precapillary sphincter temporarily shuts off blood flow to that region. The factors involved in regulating the
precapillary sphincters include the following:
•
Opening of the sphincter is triggered in response to decreased oxygen concentrations; increased carbon dioxide
concentrations; increasing levels of lactic acid or other byproducts of cellular metabolism; increasing
concentrations of potassium ions or hydrogen ions (falling pH); inflammatory chemicals such as histamines; and
increased body temperature. These conditions in turn stimulate the release of NO, a powerful vasodilator, from
endothelial cells (see Figure 20.17).
•
Contraction of the precapillary sphincter is triggered by the opposite levels of the regulators, which prompt the
release of endothelins, powerful vasoconstricting peptides secreted by endothelial cells. Platelet secretions
and certain prostaglandins may also trigger constriction.
Again, these factors alter tissue perfusion via their effects on the precapillary sphincter mechanism, which regulates
blood flow to capillaries. Since the amount of blood is limited, not all capillaries can fill at once, so blood flow is
allocated based upon the needs and metabolic state of the tissues as reflected in these parameters. Bear in mind,
however, that dilation and constriction of the arterioles feeding the capillary beds is the primary control mechanism.
The Myogenic Response
The myogenic response is a reaction to the stretching of the smooth muscle in the walls of arterioles as changes in
blood flow occur through the vessel. This may be viewed as a largely protective function against dramatic
fluctuations in blood pressure and blood flow to maintain homeostasis. If perfusion of an organ is too low
(ischemia), the tissue will experience low levels of oxygen (hypoxia). In contrast, excessive perfusion could damage
the organ’s smaller and more fragile vessels. The myogenic response is a localized process that serves to stabilize
blood flow in the capillary network that follows that arteriole.
When blood flow is low, the vessel’s smooth muscle will be only minimally stretched. In response, it relaxes,
allowing the vessel to dilate and thereby increase the movement of blood into the tissue. When blood flow is too
high, the smooth muscle will contract in response to the increased stretch, prompting vasoconstriction that reduces
blood flow.
Figure 20.20 summarizes the effects of nervous, endocrine, and local controls on arterioles.
838
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.20
Summary of Mechanisms Regulating Arteriole Smooth Muscle and Veins
Effect of Exercise on Vascular Homeostasis
The heart is a muscle and, like any muscle, it responds dramatically to exercise. For a healthy young adult, cardiac
output (heart rate × stroke volume) increases in the nonathlete from approximately 5.0 liters (5.25 quarts) per
minute to a maximum of about 20 liters (21 quarts) per minute. Accompanying this will be an increase in blood
pressure from about 120/80 to 185/75. However, well-trained aerobic athletes can increase these values
substantially. For these individuals, cardiac output soars from approximately 5.3 liters (5.57 quarts) per minute
resting to more than 30 liters (31.5 quarts) per minute during maximal exercise. Along with this increase in cardiac
output, blood pressure increases from 120/80 at rest to 200/90 at maximum values.
In addition to improved cardiac function, exercise increases the size and mass of the heart. The average weight of
the heart for the nonathlete is about 300 g, whereas in an athlete it will increase to 500 g. This increase in size
generally makes the heart stronger and more efficient at pumping blood, increasing both stroke volume and cardiac
output.
Tissue perfusion also increases as the body transitions from a resting state to light exercise and eventually to heavy
20.4 • Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
839
exercise (see Figure 20.20). These changes result in selective vasodilation in the skeletal muscles, heart, lungs,
liver, and integument. Simultaneously, vasoconstriction occurs in the vessels leading to the kidneys and most of the
digestive and reproductive organs. The flow of blood to the brain remains largely unchanged whether at rest or
exercising, since the vessels in the brain largely do not respond to regulatory stimuli, in most cases, because they
lack the appropriate receptors.
As vasodilation occurs in selected vessels, resistance drops and more blood rushes into the organs they supply. This
blood eventually returns to the venous system. Venous return is further enhanced by both the skeletal muscle and
respiratory pumps. As blood returns to the heart more quickly, preload rises and the Frank-Starling principle tells us
that contraction of the cardiac muscle in the atria and ventricles will be more forceful. Eventually, even the best-
trained athletes will fatigue and must undergo a period of rest following exercise. Cardiac output and distribution of
blood then return to normal.
Regular exercise promotes cardiovascular health in a variety of ways. Because an athlete’s heart is larger than a
nonathlete’s, stroke volume increases, so the athletic heart can deliver the same amount of blood as the nonathletic
heart but with a lower heart rate. This increased efficiency allows the athlete to exercise for longer periods of time
before muscles fatigue and places less stress on the heart. Exercise also lowers overall cholesterol levels by
removing from the circulation a complex form of cholesterol, triglycerides, and proteins known as low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs), which are widely associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Although there is no
way to remove deposits of plaque from the walls of arteries other than specialized surgery, exercise does promote
the health of vessels by decreasing the rate of plaque formation and reducing blood pressure, so the heart does not
have to generate as much force to overcome resistance.
Generally as little as 30 minutes of noncontinuous exercise over the course of each day has beneficial effects and
has been shown to lower the rate of heart attack by nearly 50 percent. While it is always advisable to follow a
healthy diet, stop smoking, and lose weight, studies have clearly shown that fit, overweight people may actually be
healthier overall than sedentary slender people. Thus, the benefits of moderate exercise are undeniable.
Clinical Considerations in Vascular Homeostasis
Any disorder that affects blood volume, vascular tone, or any other aspect of vascular functioning is likely to affect
vascular homeostasis as well. That includes hypertension, hemorrhage, and shock.
Hypertension and Hypotension
New guidelines in 2017 from the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association list normal blood
pressure (BP) as less than 120/80 mm Hg and elevated BP as systolic P between 120–129 and diastolic P less than
80 mm Hg. Chronically elevated blood pressure is known clinically as hypertension. The new guidelines list
hypertension that should be treated as 130/80 mm Hg. Tens of millions of Americans currently suffer from
hypertension. Unfortunately, hypertension is typically a silent disorder; therefore, hypertensive patients may fail to
recognize the seriousness of their condition and fail to follow their treatment plan. The result is often a heart attack
or stroke. Hypertension may also lead to an aneurysm (ballooning of a blood vessel caused by a weakening of the
wall), peripheral arterial disease (obstruction of vessels in peripheral regions of the body), chronic kidney disease, or
heart failure.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Listen to this CDC podcast (http://openstax.org/l/CDCpodcast) to learn about hypertension, often described as a
“silent killer.” What steps can you take to reduce your risk of a heart attack or stroke?
Hemorrhage
Minor blood loss is managed by hemostasis and repair. Hemorrhage is a loss of blood that cannot be controlled by
hemostatic mechanisms. Initially, the body responds to hemorrhage by initiating mechanisms aimed at increasing
blood pressure and maintaining blood flow. Ultimately, however, blood volume will need to be restored, either
through physiological processes or through medical intervention.
In response to blood loss, stimuli from the baroreceptors trigger the cardiovascular centers to stimulate
sympathetic responses to increase cardiac output and vasoconstriction. This typically prompts the heart rate to
840
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
increase to about 180–200 contractions per minute, restoring cardiac output to normal levels. Vasoconstriction of
the arterioles increases vascular resistance, whereas constriction of the veins increases venous return to the heart.
Both of these steps will help increase blood pressure. Sympathetic stimulation also triggers the release of
epinephrine and norepinephrine, which enhance both cardiac output and vasoconstriction. If blood loss were less
than 20 percent of total blood volume, these responses together would usually return blood pressure to normal and
redirect the remaining blood to the tissues.
Additional endocrine involvement is necessary, however, to restore the lost blood volume. The angiotensin-renin-
aldosterone mechanism stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus, which increases fluid consumption to help
restore the lost blood. More importantly, it increases renal reabsorption of sodium and water, reducing water loss in
urine output. The kidneys also increase the production of EPO, stimulating the formation of erythrocytes that not
only deliver oxygen to the tissues but also increase overall blood volume. Figure 20.21 summarizes the responses to
loss of blood volume.
FIGURE 20.21
Homeostatic Responses to Loss of Blood Volume
Circulatory Shock
The loss of too much blood may lead to circulatory shock, a life-threatening condition in which the circulatory
system is unable to maintain blood flow to adequately supply sufficient oxygen and other nutrients to the tissues to
maintain cellular metabolism. It should not be confused with emotional or psychological shock. Typically, the
patient in circulatory shock will demonstrate an increased heart rate but decreased blood pressure, but there are
cases in which blood pressure will remain normal. Urine output will fall dramatically, and the patient may appear
confused or lose consciousness. Urine output less than 1 mL/kg body weight/hour is cause for concern.
Unfortunately, shock is an example of a positive-feedback loop that, if uncorrected, may lead to the death of the
patient.
There are several recognized forms of shock:
•
Hypovolemic shock in adults is typically caused by hemorrhage, although in children it may be caused by fluid
losses related to severe vomiting or diarrhea. Other causes for hypovolemic shock include extensive burns,
exposure to some toxins, and excessive urine loss related to diabetes insipidus or ketoacidosis. Typically,
patients present with a rapid, almost tachycardic heart rate; a weak pulse often described as “thready;” cool,
clammy skin, particularly in the extremities, due to restricted peripheral blood flow; rapid, shallow breathing;
hypothermia; thirst; and dry mouth. Treatments generally involve providing intravenous fluids to restore the
patient to normal function and various drugs such as dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine to raise blood
pressure.
•
Cardiogenic shock results from the inability of the heart to maintain cardiac output. Most often, it results from
a myocardial infarction (heart attack), but it may also be caused by arrhythmias, valve disorders,
cardiomyopathies, cardiac failure, or simply insufficient flow of blood through the cardiac vessels. Treatment
involves repairing the damage to the heart or its vessels to resolve the underlying cause, rather than treating
20.4 • Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
841
cardiogenic shock directly.
•
Vascular shock occurs when arterioles lose their normal muscular tone and dilate dramatically. It may arise
from a variety of causes, and treatments almost always involve fluid replacement and medications, called
inotropic or pressor agents, which restore tone to the muscles of the vessels. In addition, eliminating or at least
alleviating the underlying cause of the condition is required. This might include antibiotics and antihistamines,
or select steroids, which may aid in the repair of nerve damage. A common cause is sepsis (or septicemia), also
called “blood poisoning,” which is a widespread bacterial infection that results in an organismal-level
inflammatory response known as septic shock. Neurogenic shock is a form of vascular shock that occurs with
cranial or spinal injuries that damage the cardiovascular centers in the medulla oblongata or the nervous fibers
originating from this region. Anaphylactic shock is a severe allergic response that causes the widespread
release of histamines, triggering vasodilation throughout the body.
•
Obstructive shock, as the name would suggest, occurs when a significant portion of the vascular system is
blocked. It is not always recognized as a distinct condition and may be grouped with cardiogenic shock,
including pulmonary embolism and cardiac tamponade. Treatments depend upon the underlying cause and, in
addition to administering fluids intravenously, often include the administration of anticoagulants, removal of
fluid from the pericardial cavity, or air from the thoracic cavity, and surgery as required. The most common
cause is a pulmonary embolism, a clot that lodges in the pulmonary vessels and interrupts blood flow. Other
causes include stenosis of the aortic valve; cardiac tamponade, in which excess fluid in the pericardial cavity
interferes with the ability of the heart to fully relax and fill with blood (resulting in decreased preload); and a
pneumothorax, in which an excessive amount of air is present in the thoracic cavity, outside of the lungs, which
interferes with venous return, pulmonary function, and delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
20.5 Circulatory Pathways
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the vessels through which blood travels within the pulmonary circuit, beginning from the right ventricle
of the heart and ending at the left atrium
•
Create a flow chart showing the major systemic arteries through which blood travels from the aorta and its
major branches, to the most significant arteries feeding into the right and left upper and lower limbs
•
Create a flow chart showing the major systemic veins through which blood travels from the feet to the right
atrium of the heart
Virtually every cell, tissue, organ, and system in the body is impacted by the circulatory system. This includes the
generalized and more specialized functions of transport of materials, capillary exchange, maintaining health by
transporting white blood cells and various immunoglobulins (antibodies), hemostasis, regulation of body
temperature, and helping to maintain acid-base balance. In addition to these shared functions, many systems enjoy
a unique relationship with the circulatory system. Figure 20.22 summarizes these relationships.
842
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.22
Interaction of the Circulatory System with Other Body Systems
As you learn about the vessels of the systemic and pulmonary circuits, notice that many arteries and veins share the
same names, parallel one another throughout the body, and are very similar on the right and left sides of the body.
These pairs of vessels will be traced through only one side of the body. Where differences occur in branching
patterns or when vessels are singular, this will be indicated. For example, you will find a pair of femoral arteries and
a pair of femoral veins, with one vessel on each side of the body. In contrast, some vessels closer to the midline of
the body, such as the aorta, are unique. Moreover, some superficial veins, such as the great saphenous vein in the
femoral region, have no arterial counterpart. Another phenomenon that can make the study of vessels challenging is
that names of vessels can change with location. Like a street that changes name as it passes through an
intersection, an artery or vein can change names as it passes an anatomical landmark. For example, the left
subclavian artery becomes the axillary artery as it passes through the body wall and into the axillary region, and
then becomes the brachial artery as it flows from the axillary region into the upper arm (or brachium). You will also
find examples of anastomoses where two blood vessels that previously branched reconnect. Anastomoses are
especially common in veins, where they help maintain blood flow even when one vessel is blocked or narrowed,
although there are some important ones in the arteries supplying the brain.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
843
As you read about circular pathways, notice that there is an occasional, very large artery referred to as a trunk, a
term indicating that the vessel gives rise to several smaller arteries. For example, the celiac trunk gives rise to the
left gastric, common hepatic, and splenic arteries.
As you study this section, imagine you are on a “Voyage of Discovery” similar to Lewis and Clark’s expedition in
1804–1806, which followed rivers and streams through unfamiliar territory, seeking a water route from the Atlantic
to the Pacific Ocean. You might envision being inside a miniature boat, exploring the various branches of the
circulatory system. This simple approach has proven effective for many students in mastering these major
circulatory patterns. Another approach that works well for many students is to create simple line drawings similar to
the ones provided, labeling each of the major vessels. It is beyond the scope of this text to name every vessel in the
body. However, we will attempt to discuss the major pathways for blood and acquaint you with the major named
arteries and veins in the body. Also, please keep in mind that individual variations in circulation patterns are not
uncommon.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/arts1) for a brief summary of the arteries.
Pulmonary Circulation
Recall that blood returning from the systemic circuit enters the right atrium (Figure 20.23) via the superior and
inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus, which drains the blood supply of the heart muscle. These vessels will
be described more fully later in this section. This blood is relatively low in oxygen and relatively high in carbon
dioxide, since much of the oxygen has been extracted for use by the tissues and the waste gas carbon dioxide was
picked up to be transported to the lungs for elimination. From the right atrium, blood moves into the right ventricle,
which pumps it to the lungs for gas exchange. This system of vessels is referred to as the pulmonary circuit.
The single vessel exiting the right ventricle is the pulmonary trunk. At the base of the pulmonary trunk is the
pulmonary semilunar valve, which prevents backflow of blood into the right ventricle during ventricular diastole. As
the pulmonary trunk reaches the superior surface of the heart, it curves posteriorly and rapidly bifurcates (divides)
into two branches, a left and a right pulmonary artery. To prevent confusion between these vessels, it is important
to refer to the vessel exiting the heart as the pulmonary trunk, rather than also calling it a pulmonary artery. The
pulmonary arteries in turn branch many times within the lung, forming a series of smaller arteries and arterioles that
eventually lead to the pulmonary capillaries. The pulmonary capillaries surround lung structures known as alveoli
that are the sites of oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange.
Once gas exchange is completed, oxygenated blood flows from the pulmonary capillaries into a series of pulmonary
venules that eventually lead to a series of larger pulmonary veins. Four pulmonary veins, two on the left and two on
the right, return blood to the left atrium. At this point, the pulmonary circuit is complete. Table 20.4 defines the
major arteries and veins of the pulmonary circuit discussed in the text.
FIGURE 20.23
Pulmonary Circuit
Blood exiting from the right ventricle flows into the pulmonary trunk, which bifurcates into the two
844
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
pulmonary arteries. These vessels branch to supply blood to the pulmonary capillaries, where gas exchange occurs within the lung alveoli.
Blood returns via the pulmonary veins to the left atrium.
Pulmonary Arteries and Veins
Vessel
Description
Pulmonary
trunk
Single large vessel exiting the right ventricle that divides to form the right and left pulmonary
arteries
Pulmonary
arteries
Left and right vessels that form from the pulmonary trunk and lead to smaller arterioles and
eventually to the pulmonary capillaries
Pulmonary
veins
Two sets of paired vessels—one pair on each side—that are formed from the small venules, leading
away from the pulmonary capillaries to flow into the left atrium
TABLE 20.4
Overview of Systemic Arteries
Blood relatively high in oxygen concentration is returned from the pulmonary circuit to the left atrium via the four
pulmonary veins. From the left atrium, blood moves into the left ventricle, which pumps blood into the aorta. The
aorta and its branches—the systemic arteries—send blood to virtually every organ of the body (Figure 20.24).
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
845
FIGURE 20.24
Systemic Arteries
The major systemic arteries shown here deliver oxygenated blood throughout the body.
The Aorta
The aorta is the largest artery in the body (Figure 20.25). It arises from the left ventricle and eventually descends to
the abdominal region, where it bifurcates at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra into the two common iliac
arteries. The aorta consists of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the descending aorta, which passes through
the diaphragm and a landmark that divides into the superior thoracic and inferior abdominal components. Arteries
originating from the aorta ultimately distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body. At the base of the aorta is
the aortic semilunar valve that prevents backflow of blood into the left ventricle while the heart is relaxing. After
exiting the heart, the ascending aorta moves in a superior direction for approximately 5 cm and ends at the sternal
angle. Following this ascent, it reverses direction, forming a graceful arc to the left, called the aortic arch. The aortic
arch descends toward the inferior portions of the body and ends at the level of the intervertebral disk between the
fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae. Beyond this point, the descending aorta continues close to the bodies of the
vertebrae and passes through an opening in the diaphragm known as the aortic hiatus. Superior to the diaphragm,
the aorta is called the thoracic aorta, and inferior to the diaphragm, it is called the abdominal aorta. The abdominal
846
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
aorta terminates when it bifurcates into the two common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. See
Figure 20.25 for an illustration of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the initial segment of the descending
aorta plus major branches; Table 20.5 summarizes the structures of the aorta.
FIGURE 20.25
Aorta
The aorta has distinct regions, including the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and the descending aorta, which
includes the thoracic and abdominal regions.
Components of the Aorta
Vessel
Description
Aorta
Largest artery in the body, originating from the left ventricle and descending to the abdominal
region, where it bifurcates into the common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar
vertebra; arteries originating from the aorta distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body
Ascending
aorta
Initial portion of the aorta, rising superiorly from the left ventricle for a distance of approximately
5 cm
Aortic arch
Graceful arc to the left that connects the ascending aorta to the descending aorta; ends at the
intervertebral disk between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae
Descending
aorta
Portion of the aorta that continues inferiorly past the end of the aortic arch; subdivided into the
thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta
TABLE 20.5
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
847
Vessel
Description
Thoracic
aorta
Portion of the descending aorta superior to the aortic hiatus
Abdominal
aorta
Portion of the aorta inferior to the aortic hiatus and superior to the common iliac arteries
TABLE 20.5
Coronary Circulation
The first vessels that branch from the ascending aorta are the paired coronary arteries (see Figure 20.25), which
arise from two of the three sinuses in the ascending aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve. These sinuses
contain the aortic baroreceptors and chemoreceptors critical to maintain cardiac function. The left coronary artery
arises from the left posterior aortic sinus. The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus. Normally,
the right posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a vessel.
The coronary arteries encircle the heart, forming a ring-like structure that divides into the next level of branches that
supplies blood to the heart tissues. (Seek additional content for more detail on cardiac circulation.)
Aortic Arch Branches
There are three major branches of the aortic arch: the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid artery, and
the left subclavian (literally “under the clavicle”) artery. As you would expect based upon proximity to the heart,
each of these vessels is classified as an elastic artery.
The brachiocephalic artery is located only on the right side of the body; there is no corresponding artery on the left.
The brachiocephalic artery branches into the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery. The left
subclavian and left common carotid arteries arise independently from the aortic arch but otherwise follow a similar
pattern and distribution to the corresponding arteries on the right side (see Figure 20.23).
Each subclavian artery supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous system. It then
gives rise to three major branches: the internal thoracic artery, the vertebral artery, and the thyrocervical artery. The
internal thoracic artery, or mammary artery, supplies blood to the thymus, the pericardium of the heart, and the
anterior chest wall. The vertebral artery passes through the vertebral foramen in the cervical vertebrae and then
through the foramen magnum into the cranial cavity to supply blood to the brain and spinal cord. The paired
vertebral arteries join together to form the large basilar artery at the base of the medulla oblongata. This is an
example of an anastomosis. The subclavian artery also gives rise to the thyrocervical artery that provides blood to
the thyroid, the cervical region of the neck, and the upper back and shoulder.
The common carotid artery divides into internal and external carotid arteries. The right common carotid artery
arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery arises directly from the aortic arch. The
external carotid artery supplies blood to numerous structures within the face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and
larynx. These branches include the lingual, facial, occipital, maxillary, and superficial temporal arteries. The internal
carotid artery initially forms an expansion known as the carotid sinus, containing the carotid baroreceptors and
chemoreceptors. Like their counterparts in the aortic sinuses, the information provided by these receptors is critical
to maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis (see Figure 20.23).
The internal carotid arteries along with the vertebral arteries are the two primary suppliers of blood to the human
brain. Given the central role and vital importance of the brain to life, it is critical that blood supply to this organ
remains uninterrupted. Recall that blood flow to the brain is remarkably constant, with approximately 20 percent of
blood flow directed to this organ at any given time. When blood flow is interrupted, even for just a few seconds, a
transient ischemic attack (TIA), or mini-stroke, may occur, resulting in loss of consciousness or temporary loss of
neurological function. In some cases, the damage may be permanent. Loss of blood flow for longer periods, typically
between 3 and 4 minutes, will likely produce irreversible brain damage or a stroke, also called a cerebrovascular
accident (CVA). The locations of the arteries in the brain not only provide blood flow to the brain tissue but also
prevent interruption in the flow of blood. Both the carotid and vertebral arteries branch once they enter the cranial
848
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
cavity, and some of these branches form a structure known as the arterial circle (or circle of Willis), an
anastomosis that is remarkably like a traffic circle that sends off branches (in this case, arterial branches to the
brain). As a rule, branches to the anterior portion of the cerebrum are normally fed by the internal carotid arteries;
the remainder of the brain receives blood flow from branches associated with the vertebral arteries.
The internal carotid artery continues through the carotid canal of the temporal bone and enters the base of the brain
through the carotid foramen where it gives rise to several branches (Figure 20.26 and Figure 20.27). One of these
branches is the anterior cerebral artery that supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum. Another branch, the
middle cerebral artery, supplies blood to the temporal and parietal lobes, which are the most common sites of
CVAs. The ophthalmic artery, the third major branch, provides blood to the eyes.
The right and left anterior cerebral arteries join together to form an anastomosis called the anterior communicating
artery. The initial segments of the anterior cerebral arteries and the anterior communicating artery form the anterior
portion of the arterial circle. The posterior portion of the arterial circle is formed by a left and a right posterior
communicating artery that branches from the posterior cerebral artery, which arises from the basilar artery. It
provides blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem. The basilar artery is an anastomosis that
begins at the junction of the two vertebral arteries and sends branches to the cerebellum and brain stem. It flows
into the posterior cerebral arteries. Table 20.6 summarizes the aortic arch branches, including the major branches
supplying the brain.
FIGURE 20.26
Arteries Supplying the Head and Neck
The common carotid artery gives rise to the external and internal carotid
arteries. The external carotid artery remains superficial and gives rise to many arteries of the head. The internal carotid artery first forms
the carotid sinus and then reaches the brain via the carotid canal and carotid foramen, emerging into the cranium via the foramen lacerum.
The vertebral artery branches from the subclavian artery and passes through the transverse foramen in the cervical vertebrae, entering the
base of the skull at the vertebral foramen. The subclavian artery continues toward the arm as the axillary artery.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
849
FIGURE 20.27
Arteries Serving the Brain
This inferior view shows the network of arteries serving the brain. The structure is referred
to as the arterial circle or circle of Willis.
Aortic Arch Branches and Brain Circulation
Vessel
Description
Brachiocephalic
artery
Single vessel located on the right side of the body; the first vessel branching from the aortic
arch; gives rise to the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery; supplies
blood to the head, neck, upper limb, and wall of the thoracic region
Subclavian
artery
The right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery while the left subclavian
artery arises from the aortic arch; gives rise to the internal thoracic, vertebral, and
thyrocervical arteries; supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous
system
Internal
thoracic artery
Also called the mammary artery; arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the
thymus, pericardium of the heart, and anterior chest wall
Vertebral artery
Arises from the subclavian artery and passes through the vertebral foramen through the
foramen magnum to the brain; joins with the internal carotid artery to form the arterial circle;
supplies blood to the brain and spinal cord
Thyrocervical
artery
Arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the thyroid, the cervical region, the upper
back, and shoulder
Common
carotid artery
The right common carotid artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common
carotid artery arises from the aortic arch; each gives rise to the external and internal carotid
arteries; supplies the respective sides of the head and neck
External carotid
artery
Arises from the common carotid artery; supplies blood to numerous structures within the
face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and larynx
TABLE 20.6
850
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Vessel
Description
Internal carotid
artery
Arises from the common carotid artery and begins with the carotid sinus; goes through the
carotid canal of the temporal bone to the base of the brain; combines with the branches of the
vertebral artery, forming the arterial circle; supplies blood to the brain
Arterial circle or
circle of Willis
An anastomosis located at the base of the brain that ensures continual blood supply; formed
from the branches of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries; supplies blood to the brain
Anterior
cerebral artery
Arises from the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum
Middle cerebral
artery
Another branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the temporal and parietal
lobes of the cerebrum
Ophthalmic
artery
Branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the eyes
Anterior
communicating
artery
An anastomosis of the right and left internal carotid arteries; supplies blood to the brain
Posterior
communicating
artery
Branches of the posterior cerebral artery that form part of the posterior portion of the arterial
circle; supplies blood to the brain
Posterior
cerebral artery
Branch of the basilar artery that forms a portion of the posterior segment of the arterial circle
of Willis; supplies blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem
Basilar artery
Formed from the fusion of the two vertebral arteries; sends branches to the cerebellum, brain
stem, and the posterior cerebral arteries; the main blood supply to the brain stem
TABLE 20.6
Thoracic Aorta and Major Branches
The thoracic aorta begins at the level of vertebra T5 and continues through to the diaphragm at the level of T12,
initially traveling within the mediastinum to the left of the vertebral column. As it passes through the thoracic region,
the thoracic aorta gives rise to several branches, which are collectively referred to as visceral branches and parietal
branches (Figure 20.28). Those branches that supply blood primarily to visceral organs are known as the visceral
branches and include the bronchial arteries, pericardial arteries, esophageal arteries, and the mediastinal arteries,
each named after the tissues it supplies. Each bronchial artery (typically two on the left and one on the right)
supplies systemic blood to the lungs and visceral pleura, in addition to the blood pumped to the lungs for
oxygenation via the pulmonary circuit. The bronchial arteries follow the same path as the respiratory branches,
beginning with the bronchi and ending with the bronchioles. There is considerable, but not total, intermingling of the
systemic and pulmonary blood at anastomoses in the smaller branches of the lungs. This may sound
incongruous—that is, the mixing of systemic arterial blood high in oxygen with the pulmonary arterial blood lower in
oxygen—but the systemic vessels also deliver nutrients to the lung tissue just as they do elsewhere in the body. The
mixed blood drains into typical pulmonary veins, whereas the bronchial artery branches remain separate and drain
into bronchial veins described later. Each pericardial artery supplies blood to the pericardium, the esophageal
artery provides blood to the esophagus, and the mediastinal artery provides blood to the mediastinum. The
remaining thoracic aorta branches are collectively referred to as parietal branches or somatic branches, and
include the intercostal and superior phrenic arteries. Each intercostal artery provides blood to the muscles of the
thoracic cavity and vertebral column. The superior phrenic artery provides blood to the superior surface of the
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
851
diaphragm. Table 20.7 lists the arteries of the thoracic region.
FIGURE 20.28
Arteries of the Thoracic and Abdominal Regions
The thoracic aorta gives rise to the arteries of the visceral and
parietal branches.
Arteries of the Thoracic Region
Vessel
Description
Visceral
branches
A group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the viscera (i.e., organs) of the
thorax
Bronchial
artery
Systemic branch from the aorta that provides oxygenated blood to the lungs; this blood supply is
in addition to the pulmonary circuit that brings blood for oxygenation
Pericardial
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the pericardium
Esophageal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the esophagus
Mediastinal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the mediastinum
TABLE 20.7
852
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Vessel
Description
Parietal
branches
Also called somatic branches, a group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; include those that
supply blood to the thoracic wall, vertebral column, and the superior surface of the diaphragm
Intercostal
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity and vertebral
column
Superior
phrenic
artery
Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the superior surface of the diaphragm
TABLE 20.7
Abdominal Aorta and Major Branches
After crossing through the diaphragm at the aortic hiatus, the thoracic aorta is called the abdominal aorta (see
Figure 20.28). This vessel remains to the left of the vertebral column and is embedded in adipose tissue behind the
peritoneal cavity. It formally ends at approximately the level of vertebra L4, where it bifurcates to form the common
iliac arteries. Before this division, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several important branches. A single celiac
trunk (artery) emerges and divides into the left gastric artery to supply blood to the stomach and esophagus, the
splenic artery to supply blood to the spleen, and the common hepatic artery, which in turn gives rise to the
hepatic artery proper to supply blood to the liver, the right gastric artery to supply blood to the stomach, the
cystic artery to supply blood to the gall bladder, and several branches, one to supply blood to the duodenum and
another to supply blood to the pancreas. Two additional single vessels arise from the abdominal aorta. These are
the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries. The superior mesenteric artery arises approximately 2.5 cm after the
celiac trunk and branches into several major vessels that supply blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum,
and ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine. The inferior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the
distal segment of the large intestine, including the rectum. It arises approximately 5 cm superior to the common
iliac arteries.
In addition to these single branches, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several significant paired arteries along the
way. These include the inferior phrenic arteries, the adrenal arteries, the renal arteries, the gonadal arteries, and the
lumbar arteries. Each inferior phrenic artery is a counterpart of a superior phrenic artery and supplies blood to the
inferior surface of the diaphragm. The adrenal artery supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands and arises
near the superior mesenteric artery. Each renal artery branches approximately 2.5 cm inferior to the superior
mesenteric arteries and supplies a kidney. The right renal artery is longer than the left since the aorta lies to the left
of the vertebral column and the vessel must travel a greater distance to reach its target. Renal arteries branch
repeatedly to supply blood to the kidneys. Each gonadal artery supplies blood to the gonads, or reproductive
organs, and is also described as either an ovarian artery or a testicular artery (internal spermatic), depending upon
the sex of the individual. An ovarian artery supplies blood to an ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and the uterus, and
is located within the suspensory ligament of the uterus. It is considerably shorter than a testicular artery, which
ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes, forming one component of the spermatic cord. The gonadal
arteries arise inferior to the renal arteries and are generally retroperitoneal. The ovarian artery continues to the
uterus where it forms an anastomosis with the uterine artery that supplies blood to the uterus. Both the uterine
arteries and vaginal arteries, which distribute blood to the vagina, are branches of the internal iliac artery. The four
paired lumbar arteries are the counterparts of the intercostal arteries and supply blood to the lumbar region, the
abdominal wall, and the spinal cord. In some instances, a fifth pair of lumbar arteries emerges from the median
sacral artery.
The aorta divides at approximately the level of vertebra L4 into a left and a right common iliac artery but continues
as a small vessel, the median sacral artery, into the sacrum. The common iliac arteries provide blood to the pelvic
region and ultimately to the lower limbs. They split into external and internal iliac arteries approximately at the level
of the lumbar-sacral articulation. Each internal iliac artery sends branches to the urinary bladder, the walls of the
pelvis, the external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region. In females, they also provide blood to the
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
853
uterus and vagina. The much larger external iliac artery supplies blood to each of the lower limbs. Figure 20.29
shows the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the thoracic and abdominal regions. Figure 20.30
shows the distribution of the major branches of the common iliac arteries. Table 20.8 summarizes the major
branches of the abdominal aorta.
FIGURE 20.29
Major Branches of the Aorta
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the
thoracic and abdominal regions.
854
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.30
Major Branches of the Iliac Arteries
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major branches of the common
iliac arteries into the pelvis and lower limbs. The left side follows a similar pattern to the right.
Vessels of the Abdominal Aorta
Vessel
Description
Celiac
trunk
Also called the celiac artery; a major branch of the abdominal aorta; gives rise to the left gastric
artery, the splenic artery, and the common hepatic artery that forms the hepatic artery to the liver,
the right gastric artery to the stomach, and the cystic artery to the gall bladder
Left gastric
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the stomach
Splenic
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the spleen
Common
hepatic
artery
Branch of the celiac trunk that forms the hepatic artery, the right gastric artery, and the cystic
artery
Hepatic
artery
proper
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies systemic blood to the liver
Right
gastric
artery
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the stomach
TABLE 20.8
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
855
Vessel
Description
Cystic
artery
Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the gall bladder
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and
ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the distal segment of the large intestine and
rectum
Inferior
phrenic
arteries
Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the inferior surface of the diaphragm
Adrenal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands
Renal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies each kidney
Gonadal
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the gonads or reproductive organs; also
described as ovarian arteries or testicular arteries, depending upon the sex of the individual
Ovarian
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and uterus
Testicular
artery
Branch of the abdominal aorta; ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes and forms
one component of the spermatic cord
Lumbar
arteries
Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the lumbar region, the abdominal wall, and
spinal cord
Common
iliac artery
Branch of the aorta that leads to the internal and external iliac arteries
Median
sacral
artery
Continuation of the aorta into the sacrum
Internal
iliac artery
Branch from the common iliac arteries; supplies blood to the urinary bladder, walls of the pelvis,
external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region; in females, also provides blood to
the uterus and vagina
External
iliac artery
Branch of the common iliac artery that leaves the body cavity and becomes a femoral artery;
supplies blood to the lower limbs
TABLE 20.8
856
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Arteries Serving the Upper Limbs
As the subclavian artery exits the thorax into the axillary region, it is renamed the axillary artery. Although it does
branch and supply blood to the region near the head of the humerus (via the humeral circumflex arteries), the
majority of the vessel continues into the upper arm, or brachium, and becomes the brachial artery (Figure 20.31).
The brachial artery supplies blood to much of the brachial region and divides at the elbow into several smaller
branches, including the deep brachial arteries, which provide blood to the posterior surface of the arm, and the ulnar
collateral arteries, which supply blood to the region of the elbow. As the brachial artery approaches the coronoid
fossa, it bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries, which continue into the forearm, or antebrachium. The radial
artery and ulnar artery parallel their namesake bones, giving off smaller branches until they reach the wrist, or
carpal region. At this level, they fuse to form the superficial and deep palmar arches that supply blood to the hand,
as well as the digital arteries that supply blood to the digits. Figure 20.32 shows the distribution of systemic
arteries from the heart into the upper limb. Table 20.9 summarizes the arteries serving the upper limbs.
FIGURE 20.31
Major Arteries Serving the Thorax and Upper Limb
The arteries that supply blood to the arms and hands are
extensions of the subclavian arteries.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
857
FIGURE 20.32
Major Arteries of the Upper Limb
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the major arteries from the heart into
the upper limb.
Arteries Serving the Upper Limbs
Vessel
Description
Axillary
artery
Continuation of the subclavian artery as it penetrates the body wall and enters the axillary region;
supplies blood to the region near the head of the humerus (humeral circumflex arteries); the
majority of the vessel continues into the brachium and becomes the brachial artery
Brachial
artery
Continuation of the axillary artery in the brachium; supplies blood to much of the brachial region;
gives off several smaller branches that provide blood to the posterior surface of the arm in the
region of the elbow; bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries at the coronoid fossa
Radial
artery
Formed at the bifurcation of the brachial artery; parallels the radius; gives off smaller branches
until it reaches the carpal region where it fuses with the ulnar artery to form the superficial and
deep palmar arches; supplies blood to the lower arm and carpal region
Ulnar
artery
Formed at the bifurcation of the brachial artery; parallels the ulna; gives off smaller branches until
it reaches the carpal region where it fuses with the radial artery to form the superficial and deep
palmar arches; supplies blood to the lower arm and carpal region
TABLE 20.9
858
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Vessel
Description
Palmar
arches
(superficial
and deep)
Formed from anastomosis of the radial and ulnar arteries; supply blood to the hand and digital
arteries
Digital
arteries
Formed from the superficial and deep palmar arches; supply blood to the digits
TABLE 20.9
Arteries Serving the Lower Limbs
The external iliac artery exits the body cavity and enters the femoral region of the lower leg (Figure 20.33). As it
passes through the body wall, it is renamed the femoral artery. It gives off several smaller branches as well as the
lateral deep femoral artery that in turn gives rise to a lateral circumflex artery. These arteries supply blood to the
deep muscles of the thigh as well as ventral and lateral regions of the integument. The femoral artery also gives rise
to the genicular artery, which provides blood to the region of the knee. As the femoral artery passes posterior to the
knee near the popliteal fossa, it is called the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery branches into the anterior and
posterior tibial arteries.
The anterior tibial artery is located between the tibia and fibula, and supplies blood to the muscles and integument
of the anterior tibial region. Upon reaching the tarsal region, it becomes the dorsalis pedis artery, which branches
repeatedly and provides blood to the tarsal and dorsal regions of the foot. The posterior tibial artery provides blood
to the muscles and integument on the posterior surface of the tibial region. The fibular or peroneal artery branches
from the posterior tibial artery. It bifurcates and becomes the medial plantar artery and lateral plantar artery,
providing blood to the plantar surfaces. There is an anastomosis with the dorsalis pedis artery, and the medial and
lateral plantar arteries form two arches called the dorsal arch (also called the arcuate arch) and the plantar arch,
which provide blood to the remainder of the foot and toes. Figure 20.34 shows the distribution of the major systemic
arteries in the lower limb. Table 20.10 summarizes the major systemic arteries discussed in the text.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
859
FIGURE 20.33
Major Arteries Serving the Lower Limb
Major arteries serving the lower limb are shown in anterior and posterior views.
860
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.34
Systemic Arteries of the Lower Limb
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the systemic arteries from the
external iliac artery into the lower limb.
Arteries Serving the Lower Limbs
Vessel
Description
Femoral
artery
Continuation of the external iliac artery after it passes through the body cavity; divides into several
smaller branches, the lateral deep femoral artery, and the genicular artery; becomes the popliteal
artery as it passes posterior to the knee
Deep
femoral
artery
Branch of the femoral artery; gives rise to the lateral circumflex arteries
Lateral
circumflex
artery
Branch of the deep femoral artery; supplies blood to the deep muscles of the thigh and the ventral
and lateral regions of the integument
TABLE 20.10
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
861
Vessel
Description
Genicular
artery
Branch of the femoral artery; supplies blood to the region of the knee
Popliteal
artery
Continuation of the femoral artery posterior to the knee; branches into the anterior and posterior
tibial arteries
Anterior
tibial
artery
Branches from the popliteal artery; supplies blood to the anterior tibial region; becomes the
dorsalis pedis artery
Dorsalis
pedis
artery
Forms from the anterior tibial artery; branches repeatedly to supply blood to the tarsal and dorsal
regions of the foot
Posterior
tibial
artery
Branches from the popliteal artery and gives rise to the fibular or peroneal artery; supplies blood to
the posterior tibial region
Medial
plantar
artery
Arises from the bifurcation of the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the medial plantar
surfaces of the foot
Lateral
plantar
artery
Arises from the bifurcation of the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the lateral plantar
surfaces of the foot
Dorsal or
arcuate
arch
Formed from the anastomosis of the dorsalis pedis artery and the medial and plantar arteries;
branches supply the distal portions of the foot and digits
Plantar
arch
Formed from the anastomosis of the dorsalis pedis artery and the medial and plantar arteries;
branches supply the distal portions of the foot and digits
TABLE 20.10
Overview of Systemic Veins
Systemic veins return blood to the right atrium. Since the blood has already passed through the systemic capillaries,
it will be relatively low in oxygen concentration. In many cases, there will be veins draining organs and regions of the
body with the same name as the arteries that supplied these regions and the two often parallel one another. This is
often described as a “complementary” pattern. However, there is a great deal more variability in the venous
circulation than normally occurs in the arteries. For the sake of brevity and clarity, this text will discuss only the most
commonly encountered patterns. However, keep this variation in mind when you move from the classroom to
clinical practice.
In both the neck and limb regions, there are often both superficial and deeper levels of veins. The deeper veins
generally correspond to the complementary arteries. The superficial veins do not normally have direct arterial
counterparts, but in addition to returning blood, they also make contributions to the maintenance of body
temperature. When the ambient temperature is warm, more blood is diverted to the superficial veins where heat can
be more easily dissipated to the environment. In colder weather, there is more constriction of the superficial veins
and blood is diverted deeper where the body can retain more of the heat.
862
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
The “Voyage of Discovery” analogy and stick drawings mentioned earlier remain valid techniques for the study of
systemic veins, but veins present a more difficult challenge because there are numerous anastomoses and multiple
branches. It is like following a river with many tributaries and channels, several of which interconnect. Tracing blood
flow through arteries follows the current in the direction of blood flow, so that we move from the heart through the
large arteries and into the smaller arteries to the capillaries. From the capillaries, we move into the smallest veins
and follow the direction of blood flow into larger veins and back to the heart. Figure 20.35 outlines the path of the
major systemic veins.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/veinsum) for a brief online summary of the veins.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
863
FIGURE 20.35
Major Systemic Veins of the Body
The major systemic veins of the body are shown here in an anterior view.
The right atrium receives all of the systemic venous return. Most of the blood flows into either the superior vena
cava or inferior vena cava. If you draw an imaginary line at the level of the diaphragm, systemic venous circulation
from above that line will generally flow into the superior vena cava; this includes blood from the head, neck, chest,
shoulders, and upper limbs. The exception to this is that most venous blood flow from the coronary veins flows
directly into the coronary sinus and from there directly into the right atrium. Beneath the diaphragm, systemic
venous flow enters the inferior vena cava, that is, blood from the abdominal and pelvic regions and the lower limbs.
The Superior Vena Cava
The superior vena cava drains most of the body superior to the diaphragm (Figure 20.36). On both the left and right
sides, the subclavian vein forms when the axillary vein passes through the body wall from the axillary region. It
fuses with the external and internal jugular veins from the head and neck to form the brachiocephalic vein. Each
864
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
vertebral vein also flows into the brachiocephalic vein close to this fusion. These veins arise from the base of the
brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord, and flow largely through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical
vertebrae. They are the counterparts of the vertebral arteries. Each internal thoracic vein, also known as an internal
mammary vein, drains the anterior surface of the chest wall and flows into the brachiocephalic vein.
The remainder of the blood supply from the thorax drains into the azygos vein. Each intercostal vein drains muscles
of the thoracic wall, each esophageal vein delivers blood from the inferior portions of the esophagus, each
bronchial vein drains the systemic circulation from the lungs, and several smaller veins drain the mediastinal
region. Bronchial veins carry approximately 13 percent of the blood that flows into the bronchial arteries; the
remainder intermingles with the pulmonary circulation and returns to the heart via the pulmonary veins. These veins
flow into the azygos vein, and with the smaller hemiazygos vein (hemi- = “half”) on the left of the vertebral column,
drain blood from the thoracic region. The hemiazygos vein does not drain directly into the superior vena cava but
enters the brachiocephalic vein via the superior intercostal vein.
The azygos vein passes through the diaphragm from the thoracic cavity on the right side of the vertebral column and
begins in the lumbar region of the thoracic cavity. It flows into the superior vena cava at approximately the level of
T2, making a significant contribution to the flow of blood. It combines with the two large left and right
brachiocephalic veins to form the superior vena cava.
Table 20.11 summarizes the veins of the thoracic region that flow into the superior vena cava.
FIGURE 20.36
Veins of the Thoracic and Abdominal Regions
Veins of the thoracic and abdominal regions drain blood from the area
above the diaphragm, returning it to the right atrium via the superior vena cava.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
865
Veins of the Thoracic Region
Vessel
Description
Superior vena
cava
Large systemic vein; drains blood from most areas superior to the diaphragm; empties into
the right atrium
Subclavian vein
Located deep in the thoracic cavity; formed by the axillary vein as it enters the thoracic cavity
from the axillary region; drains the axillary and smaller local veins near the scapular region
and leads to the brachiocephalic vein
Brachiocephalic
veins
Pair of veins that form from a fusion of the external and internal jugular veins and the
subclavian vein; subclavian, external and internal jugulars, vertebral, and internal thoracic
veins flow into it; drain the upper thoracic region and lead to the superior vena cava
Vertebral vein
Arises from the base of the brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord; passes through
the intervertebral foramina in the cervical vertebrae; drains smaller veins from the cranium,
spinal cord, and vertebrae, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein; counterpart of the vertebral
artery
Internal
thoracic veins
Also called internal mammary veins; drain the anterior surface of the chest wall and lead to
the brachiocephalic vein
Intercostal vein
Drains the muscles of the thoracic wall and leads to the azygos vein
Esophageal
vein
Drains the inferior portions of the esophagus and leads to the azygos vein
Bronchial vein
Drains the systemic circulation from the lungs and leads to the azygos vein
Azygos vein
Originates in the lumbar region and passes through the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity on
the right side of the vertebral column; drains blood from the intercostal veins, esophageal
veins, bronchial veins, and other veins draining the mediastinal region, and leads to the
superior vena cava
Hemiazygos
vein
Smaller vein complementary to the azygos vein; drains the esophageal veins from the
esophagus and the left intercostal veins, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein via the
superior intercostal vein
TABLE 20.11
Veins of the Head and Neck
Blood from the brain and the superficial facial vein flow into each internal jugular vein (Figure 20.37). Blood from
the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, including the temporal vein and maxillary
vein, flow into each external jugular vein. Although the external and internal jugular veins are separate vessels,
there are anastomoses between them close to the thoracic region. Blood from the external jugular vein empties into
the subclavian vein. Table 20.12 summarizes the major veins of the head and neck.
866
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Major Veins of the Head and Neck
Vessel
Description
Internal
jugular
vein
Parallel to the common carotid artery, which is more or less its counterpart, and passes through the
jugular foramen and canal; primarily drains blood from the brain, receives the superficial facial vein,
and empties into the subclavian vein
Temporal
vein
Drains blood from the temporal region and flows into the external jugular vein
Maxillary
vein
Drains blood from the maxillary region and flows into the external jugular vein
External
jugular
vein
Drains blood from the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, and leads to
the subclavian vein
TABLE 20.12
Venous Drainage of the Brain
Circulation to the brain is both critical and complex (see Figure 20.37). Many smaller veins of the brain stem and the
superficial veins of the cerebrum lead to larger vessels referred to as intracranial sinuses. These include the superior
and inferior sagittal sinuses, straight sinus, cavernous sinuses, left and right sinuses, the petrosal sinuses, and the
occipital sinuses. Ultimately, sinuses will lead back to either the inferior jugular vein or vertebral vein.
Most of the veins on the superior surface of the cerebrum flow into the largest of the sinuses, the superior sagittal
sinus. It is located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater within the falx
cerebri and, at first glance in images or models, can be mistaken for the subarachnoid space. Most reabsorption of
cerebrospinal fluid occurs via the chorionic villi (arachnoid granulations) into the superior sagittal sinus. Blood from
most of the smaller vessels originating from the inferior cerebral veins flows into the great cerebral vein and into
the straight sinus. Other cerebral veins and those from the eye socket flow into the cavernous sinus, which flows
into the petrosal sinus and then into the internal jugular vein. The occipital sinus, sagittal sinus, and straight
sinuses all flow into the left and right transverse sinuses near the lambdoid suture. The transverse sinuses in turn
flow into the sigmoid sinuses that pass through the jugular foramen and into the internal jugular vein. The internal
jugular vein flows parallel to the common carotid artery and is more or less its counterpart. It empties into the
brachiocephalic vein. The veins draining the cervical vertebrae and the posterior surface of the skull, including some
blood from the occipital sinus, flow into the vertebral veins. These parallel the vertebral arteries and travel through
the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. The vertebral veins also flow into the brachiocephalic veins. Table
20.13 summarizes the major veins of the brain.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
867
FIGURE 20.37
Veins of the Head and Neck
This left lateral view shows the veins of the head and neck, including the intercranial
sinuses.
Major Veins of the Brain
Vessel
Description
Superior
sagittal
sinus
Enlarged vein located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater
within the falx cerebri; receives most of the blood drained from the superior surface of the
cerebrum and leads to the inferior jugular vein and the vertebral vein
Great
cerebral
vein
Receives most of the smaller vessels from the inferior cerebral veins and leads to the straight sinus
Straight
sinus
Enlarged vein that drains blood from the brain; receives most of the blood from the great cerebral
vein and leads to the left or right transverse sinus
Cavernous
sinus
Enlarged vein that receives blood from most of the other cerebral veins and the eye socket, and
leads to the petrosal sinus
Petrosal
sinus
Enlarged vein that receives blood from the cavernous sinus and leads into the internal jugular veins
TABLE 20.13
868
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Vessel
Description
Occipital
sinus
Enlarged vein that drains the occipital region near the falx cerebelli and leads to the left and right
transverse sinuses, and also the vertebral veins
Transverse
sinuses
Pair of enlarged veins near the lambdoid suture that drains the occipital, sagittal, and straight
sinuses, and leads to the sigmoid sinuses
Sigmoid
sinuses
Enlarged vein that receives blood from the transverse sinuses and leads through the jugular
foramen to the internal jugular vein
TABLE 20.13
Veins Draining the Upper Limbs
The digital veins in the fingers come together in the hand to form the palmar venous arches (Figure 20.38). From
here, the veins come together to form the radial vein, the ulnar vein, and the median antebrachial vein. The radial
vein and the ulnar vein parallel the bones of the forearm and join together at the antebrachium to form the brachial
vein, a deep vein that flows into the axillary vein in the brachium.
The median antebrachial vein parallels the ulnar vein, is more medial in location, and joins the basilic vein in the
forearm. As the basilic vein reaches the antecubital region, it gives off a branch called the median cubital vein that
crosses at an angle to join the cephalic vein. The median cubital vein is the most common site for drawing venous
blood in humans. The basilic vein continues through the arm medially and superficially to the axillary vein.
The cephalic vein begins in the antebrachium and drains blood from the superficial surface of the arm into the
axillary vein. It is extremely superficial and easily seen along the surface of the biceps brachii muscle in individuals
with good muscle tone and in those without excessive subcutaneous adipose tissue in the arms.
The subscapular vein drains blood from the subscapular region and joins the cephalic vein to form the axillary
vein. As it passes through the body wall and enters the thorax, the axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein.
Many of the larger veins of the thoracic and abdominal region and upper limb are further represented in the flow
chart in Figure 20.39. Table 20.14 summarizes the veins of the upper limbs.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
869
FIGURE 20.38
Veins of the Upper Limb
This anterior view shows the veins that drain the upper limb.
870
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.39
Veins Flowing into the Superior Vena Cava
The flow chart summarizes the distribution of the veins flowing into the
superior vena cava.
Veins of the Upper Limbs
Vessel
Description
Digital veins
Drain the digits and lead to the palmar arches of the hand and dorsal venous arch of the foot
Palmar
venous
arches
Drain the hand and digits, and lead to the radial vein, ulnar veins, and the median antebrachial
vein
Radial vein
Vein that parallels the radius and radial artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to
the brachial vein
Ulnar vein
Vein that parallels the ulna and ulnar artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to
the brachial vein
TABLE 20.14
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
871
Vessel
Description
Brachial
vein
Deeper vein of the arm that forms from the radial and ulnar veins in the lower arm; leads to the
axillary vein
Median
antebrachial
vein
Vein that parallels the ulnar vein but is more medial in location; intertwines with the palmar
venous arches; leads to the basilic vein
Basilic vein
Superficial vein of the arm that arises from the median antebrachial vein, intersects with the
median cubital vein, parallels the ulnar vein, and continues into the upper arm; along with the
brachial vein, it leads to the axillary vein
Median
cubital vein
Superficial vessel located in the antecubital region that links the cephalic vein to the basilic vein
in the form of a v; a frequent site from which to draw blood
Cephalic
vein
Superficial vessel in the upper arm; leads to the axillary vein
Subscapular
vein
Drains blood from the subscapular region and leads to the axillary vein
Axillary vein
The major vein in the axillary region; drains the upper limb and becomes the subclavian vein
TABLE 20.14
The Inferior Vena Cava
Other than the small amount of blood drained by the azygos and hemiazygos veins, most of the blood inferior to the
diaphragm drains into the inferior vena cava before it is returned to the heart (see Figure 20.36). Lying just beneath
the parietal peritoneum in the abdominal cavity, the inferior vena cava parallels the abdominal aorta, where it can
receive blood from abdominal veins. The lumbar portions of the abdominal wall and spinal cord are drained by a
series of lumbar veins, usually four on each side. The ascending lumbar veins drain into either the azygos vein on
the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left, and return to the superior vena cava. The remaining lumbar veins drain
directly into the inferior vena cava.
Blood supply from the kidneys flows into each renal vein, normally the largest veins entering the inferior vena cava.
A number of other, smaller veins empty into the left renal vein. Each adrenal vein drains the adrenal or suprarenal
glands located immediately superior to the kidneys. The right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly,
whereas the left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein.
From the male reproductive organs, each testicular vein flows from the scrotum, forming a portion of the spermatic
cord. Each ovarian vein drains an ovary in females. Each of these veins is generically called a gonadal vein. The
right gonadal vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava, and the left gonadal vein empties into the left renal
vein.
Each side of the diaphragm drains into a phrenic vein; the right phrenic vein empties directly into the inferior vena
cava, whereas the left phrenic vein empties into the left renal vein. Blood supply from the liver drains into each
hepatic vein and directly into the inferior vena cava. Since the inferior vena cava lies primarily to the right of the
vertebral column and aorta, the left renal vein is longer, as are the left phrenic, adrenal, and gonadal veins. The
longer length of the left renal vein makes the left kidney the primary target of surgeons removing this organ for
donation. Figure 20.40 provides a flow chart of the veins flowing into the inferior vena cava. Table 20.15 summarizes
the major veins of the abdominal region.
872
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.40
Venous Flow into Inferior Vena Cava
The flow chart summarizes veins that deliver blood to the inferior vena cava.
Major Veins of the Abdominal Region
Vessel
Description
Inferior
vena
cava
Large systemic vein that drains blood from areas largely inferior to the diaphragm; empties into the
right atrium
Lumbar
veins
Series of veins that drain the lumbar portion of the abdominal wall and spinal cord; the ascending
lumbar veins drain into the azygos vein on the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left; the remaining
lumbar veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava
Renal
vein
Largest vein entering the inferior vena cava; drains the kidneys and flows into the inferior vena cava
TABLE 20.15
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
873
Vessel
Description
Adrenal
vein
Drains the adrenal or suprarenal; the right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly and the
left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein
Testicular
vein
Drains the testes and forms part of the spermatic cord; the right testicular vein empties directly into
the inferior vena cava and the left testicular vein empties into the left renal vein
Ovarian
vein
Drains the ovary; the right ovarian vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava and the left
ovarian vein empties into the left renal vein
Gonadal
vein
Generic term for a vein draining a reproductive organ; may be either an ovarian vein or a testicular
vein, depending on the sex of the individual
Phrenic
vein
Drains the diaphragm; the right phrenic vein flows into the inferior vena cava and the left phrenic
vein empties into the left renal vein
Hepatic
vein
Drains systemic blood from the liver and flows into the inferior vena cava
TABLE 20.15
Veins Draining the Lower Limbs
The superior surface of the foot drains into the digital veins, and the inferior surface drains into the plantar veins,
which flow into a complex series of anastomoses in the feet and ankles, including the dorsal venous arch and the
plantar venous arch (Figure 20.41). From the dorsal venous arch, blood supply drains into the anterior and
posterior tibial veins. The anterior tibial vein drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and combines with the
posterior tibial vein and the fibular vein to form the popliteal vein. The posterior tibial vein drains the posterior
surface of the tibia and joins the popliteal vein. The fibular vein drains the muscles and integument in proximity to
the fibula and also joins the popliteal vein. The small saphenous vein located on the lateral surface of the leg drains
blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg and foot, and flows into to the popliteal vein. As the popliteal
vein passes behind the knee in the popliteal region, it becomes the femoral vein. It is palpable in patients without
excessive adipose tissue.
Close to the body wall, the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the femoral circumflex vein drain into
the femoral vein. The great saphenous vein is a prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg
and thigh that collects blood from the superficial portions of these areas. The deep femoral vein, as the name
suggests, drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh. The femoral circumflex vein forms a loop around the
femur just inferior to the trochanters and drains blood from the areas in proximity to the head and neck of the femur.
As the femoral vein penetrates the body wall from the femoral portion of the upper limb, it becomes the external
iliac vein, a large vein that drains blood from the leg to the common iliac vein. The pelvic organs and integument
drain into the internal iliac vein, which forms from several smaller veins in the region, including the umbilical veins
that run on either side of the bladder. The external and internal iliac veins combine near the inferior portion of the
sacroiliac joint to form the common iliac vein. In addition to blood supply from the external and internal iliac veins,
the middle sacral vein drains the sacral region into the common iliac vein. Similar to the common iliac arteries, the
common iliac veins come together at the level of L5 to form the inferior vena cava.
Figure 20.42 is a flow chart of veins flowing into the lower limb. Table 20.16 summarizes the major veins of the
lower limbs.
874
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 20.41
Major Veins Serving the Lower Limbs
Anterior and posterior views show the major veins that drain the lower limb into
the inferior vena cava.
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
875
FIGURE 20.42
Major Veins of the Lower Limb
The flow chart summarizes venous flow from the lower limb.
Veins of the Lower Limbs
Vessel
Description
Plantar
veins
Drain the foot and flow into the plantar venous arch
Dorsal
venous
arch
Drains blood from digital veins and vessels on the superior surface of the foot
Plantar
venous
arch
Formed from the plantar veins; flows into the anterior and posterior tibial veins through
anastomoses
Anterior
tibial vein
Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and flows
into the popliteal vein
TABLE 20.16
876
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Vessel
Description
Posterior
tibial vein
Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the posterior surface of the tibia and
flows into the popliteal vein
Fibular
vein
Drains the muscles and integument near the fibula and flows into the popliteal vein
Small
saphenous
vein
Located on the lateral surface of the leg; drains blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg
and foot, and flows into the popliteal vein
Popliteal
vein
Drains the region behind the knee and forms from the fusion of the fibular, anterior, and posterior
tibial veins; flows into the femoral vein
Great
saphenous
vein
Prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh; drains the superficial
portions of these areas and flows into the femoral vein
Deep
femoral
vein
Drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh and flows into the femoral vein
Femoral
circumflex
vein
Forms a loop around the femur just inferior to the trochanters; drains blood from the areas around
the head and neck of the femur; flows into the femoral vein
Femoral
vein
Drains the upper leg; receives blood from the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the
femoral circumflex vein; becomes the external iliac vein when it crosses the body wall
External
iliac vein
Formed when the femoral vein passes into the body cavity; drains the legs and flows into the
common iliac vein
Internal
iliac vein
Drains the pelvic organs and integument; formed from several smaller veins in the region; flows
into the common iliac vein
Middle
sacral vein
Drains the sacral region and flows into the left common iliac vein
Common
iliac vein
Flows into the inferior vena cava at the level of L5; the left common iliac vein drains the sacral
region; formed from the union of the external and internal iliac veins near the inferior portion of the
sacroiliac joint
TABLE 20.16
Hepatic Portal System
The liver is a complex biochemical processing plant. It packages nutrients absorbed by the digestive system;
produces plasma proteins, clotting factors, and bile; and disposes of worn-out cell components and waste products.
Instead of entering the circulation directly, absorbed nutrients and certain wastes (for example, materials produced
by the spleen) travel to the liver for processing. They do so via the hepatic portal system (Figure 20.43). Portal
systems begin and end in capillaries. In this case, the initial capillaries from the stomach, small intestine, large
intestine, and spleen lead to the hepatic portal vein and end in specialized capillaries within the liver, the hepatic
20.5 • Circulatory Pathways
877
sinusoids. You saw the only other portal system with the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal vessel in the endocrine
chapter.
The hepatic portal system consists of the hepatic portal vein and the veins that drain into it. The hepatic portal vein
itself is relatively short, beginning at the level of L2 with the confluence of the superior mesenteric and splenic veins.
It also receives branches from the inferior mesenteric vein, plus the splenic veins and all their tributaries. The
superior mesenteric vein receives blood from the small intestine, two-thirds of the large intestine, and the stomach.
The inferior mesenteric vein drains the distal third of the large intestine, including the descending colon, the sigmoid
colon, and the rectum. The splenic vein is formed from branches from the spleen, pancreas, and portions of the
stomach, and the inferior mesenteric vein. After its formation, the hepatic portal vein also receives branches from
the gastric veins of the stomach and cystic veins from the gall bladder. The hepatic portal vein delivers materials
from these digestive and circulatory organs directly to the liver for processing.
Because of the hepatic portal system, the liver receives its blood supply from two different sources: from normal
systemic circulation via the hepatic artery and from the hepatic portal vein. The liver processes the blood from the
portal system to remove certain wastes and excess nutrients, which are stored for later use. This processed blood,
as well as the systemic blood that came from the hepatic artery, exits the liver via the right, left, and middle hepatic
veins, and flows into the inferior vena cava. Overall systemic blood composition remains relatively stable, since the
liver is able to metabolize the absorbed digestive components.
FIGURE 20.43
Hepatic Portal System
The liver receives blood from the normal systemic circulation via the hepatic artery. It also
receives and processes blood from other organs, delivered via the veins of the hepatic portal system. All blood exits the liver via the hepatic
vein, which delivers the blood to the inferior vena cava. (Different colors are used to help distinguish among the different vessels in the
system.)
20.6 Development of Blood Vessels and Fetal Circulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the development of blood vessels
•
Describe the fetal circulation
In a developing embryo,the heart has developed enough by day 21 post-fertilization to begin beating. Circulation
patterns are clearly established by the fourth week of embryonic life. It is critical to the survival of the developing
human that the circulatory system forms early to supply the growing tissue with nutrients and gases, and to remove
waste products. Blood cells and vessel production in structures outside the embryo proper called the yolk sac,
chorion, and connecting stalk begin about 15 to 16 days following fertilization. Development of these circulatory
elements within the embryo itself begins approximately 2 days later. You will learn more about the formation and
878
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
function of these early structures when you study the chapter on development. During those first few weeks, blood
vessels begin to form from the embryonic mesoderm. The precursor cells are known as hemangioblasts. These in
turn differentiate into angioblasts, which give rise to the blood vessels and pluripotent stem cells, which
differentiate into the formed elements of blood. (Seek additional content for more detail on fetal development and
circulation.) Together, these cells form masses known as blood islands scattered throughout the embryonic disc.
Spaces appear on the blood islands that develop into vessel lumens. The endothelial lining of the vessels arise from
the angioblasts within these islands. Surrounding mesenchymal cells give rise to the smooth muscle and connective
tissue layers of the vessels. While the vessels are developing, the pluripotent stem cells begin to form the blood.
Vascular tubes also develop on the blood islands, and they eventually connect to one another as well as to the
developing, tubular heart. Thus, the developmental pattern, rather than beginning from the formation of one central
vessel and spreading outward, occurs in many regions simultaneously with vessels later joining together. This
angiogenesis—the creation of new blood vessels from existing ones—continues as needed throughout life as we
grow and develop.
Blood vessel development often follows the same pattern as nerve development and travels to the same target
tissues and organs. This occurs because the many factors directing growth of nerves also stimulate blood vessels to
follow a similar pattern. Whether a given vessel develops into an artery or a vein is dependent upon local
concentrations of signaling proteins.
As the embryo grows within the mother’s uterus, its requirements for nutrients and gas exchange also grow. The
placenta—a circulatory organ unique to pregnancy—develops jointly from the embryo and uterine wall structures to
fill this need. Emerging from the placenta is the umbilical vein, which carries oxygen-rich blood from the pregnant
person to the fetal inferior vena cava via the ductus venosus to the heart that pumps it into fetal circulation. Two
umbilical arteries carry oxygen-depleted fetal blood, including wastes and carbon dioxide, to the placenta.
Remnants of the umbilical arteries remain in the adult. (Seek additional content for more information on the role of
the placenta in fetal circulation.)
There are three major shunts—alternate paths for blood flow—found in the circulatory system of the fetus. Two of
these shunts divert blood from the pulmonary to the systemic circuit, whereas the third connects the umbilical vein
to the inferior vena cava. The first two shunts are critical during fetal life, when the lungs are compressed, filled with
amniotic fluid, and nonfunctional, and gas exchange is provided by the placenta. These shunts close shortly after
birth, however, when the newborn begins to breathe. The third shunt persists a bit longer but becomes
nonfunctional once the umbilical cord is severed. The three shunts are as follows (Figure 20.44):
•
The foramen ovale is an opening in the interatrial septum that allows blood to flow from the right atrium to the
left atrium. A valve associated with this opening prevents backflow of blood during the fetal period. As the
newborn begins to breathe and blood pressure in the atria increases, this shunt closes. The fossa ovalis remains
in the interatrial septum after birth, marking the location of the former foramen ovale.
•
The ductus arteriosus is a short, muscular vessel that connects the pulmonary trunk to the aorta. Most of the
blood pumped from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk is thereby diverted into the aorta. Only enough
blood reaches the fetal lungs to maintain the developing lung tissue. When the newborn takes the first breath,
pressure within the lungs drops dramatically, and both the lungs and the pulmonary vessels expand. As the
amount of oxygen increases, the smooth muscles in the wall of the ductus arteriosus constrict, sealing off the
passage. Eventually, the muscular and endothelial components of the ductus arteriosus degenerate, leaving
only the connective tissue component of the ligamentum arteriosum.
•
The ductus venosus is a temporary blood vessel that branches from the umbilical vein, allowing much of the
freshly oxygenated blood from the placenta—the organ of gas exchange between the pregnant person and
fetus—to bypass the fetal liver and go directly to the fetal heart. The ductus venosus closes slowly during the
first weeks of infancy and degenerates to become the ligamentum venosum.
20.6 • Development of Blood Vessels and Fetal Circulation
879
FIGURE 20.44
Fetal Shunts
The foramen ovale in the interatrial septum allows blood to flow from the right atrium to the left atrium.
The ductus arteriosus is a temporary vessel, connecting the aorta to the pulmonary trunk. The ductus venosus links the umbilical vein to
the inferior vena cava largely through the liver.
880
20 • The Cardiovascular System: Blood Vessels and Circulation
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
abdominal aorta
portion of the aorta inferior to the
aortic hiatus and superior to the common iliac
arteries
adrenal artery
branch of the abdominal aorta;
supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands
adrenal vein
drains the adrenal or suprarenal glands
that are immediately superior to the kidneys; the
right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava
directly and the left adrenal vein enters the left
renal vein
anaphylactic shock
type of shock that follows a
severe allergic reaction and results from massive
vasodilation
angioblasts
stem cells that give rise to blood vessels
angiogenesis
development of new blood vessels
from existing vessels
anterior cerebral artery
arises from the internal
carotid artery; supplies the frontal lobe of the
cerebrum
anterior communicating artery
anastomosis of the
right and left internal carotid arteries; supplies
blood to the brain
anterior tibial artery
branches from the popliteal
artery; supplies blood to the anterior tibial region;
becomes the dorsalis pedis artery
anterior tibial vein
forms from the dorsal venous
arch; drains the area near the tibialis anterior
muscle and leads to the popliteal vein
aorta
largest artery in the body, originating from the
left ventricle and descending to the abdominal
region where it bifurcates into the common iliac
arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra;
arteries originating from the aorta distribute blood
to virtually all tissues of the body
aortic arch
arc that connects the ascending aorta to
the descending aorta; ends at the intervertebral disk
between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae
aortic hiatus
opening in the diaphragm that allows
passage of the thoracic aorta into the abdominal
region where it becomes the abdominal aorta
aortic sinuses
small pockets in the ascending aorta
near the aortic valve that are the locations of the
baroreceptors (stretch receptors) and
chemoreceptors that trigger a reflex that aids in the
regulation of vascular homeostasis
arterial circle
(also, circle of Willis) anastomosis
located at the base of the brain that ensures
continual blood supply; formed from branches of
the internal carotid and vertebral arteries; supplies
blood to the brain
arteriole
(also, resistance vessel) very small artery
that leads to a capillary
arteriovenous anastomosis
short vessel connecting
an arteriole directly to a venule and bypassing the
capillary beds
artery
blood vessel that conducts blood away from
the heart; may be a conducting or distributing vessel
ascending aorta
initial portion of the aorta, rising
from the left ventricle for a distance of
approximately 5 cm
atrial reflex
mechanism for maintaining vascular
homeostasis involving atrial baroreceptors: if blood
is returning to the right atrium more rapidly than it is
being ejected from the left ventricle, the atrial
receptors will stimulate the cardiovascular centers
to increase sympathetic firing and increase cardiac
output until the situation is reversed; the opposite is
also true
axillary artery
continuation of the subclavian artery
as it penetrates the body wall and enters the axillary
region; supplies blood to the region near the head of
the humerus (humeral circumflex arteries); the
majority of the vessel continues into the brachium
and becomes the brachial artery
axillary vein
major vein in the axillary region; drains
the upper limb and becomes the subclavian vein
azygos vein
originates in the lumbar region and
passes through the diaphragm into the thoracic
cavity on the right side of the vertebral column;
drains blood from the intercostal veins, esophageal
veins, bronchial veins, and other veins draining the
mediastinal region; leads to the superior vena cava
basilar artery
formed from the fusion of the two
vertebral arteries; sends branches to the
cerebellum, brain stem, and the posterior cerebral
arteries; the main blood supply to the brain stem
basilic vein
superficial vein of the arm that arises
from the palmar venous arches, intersects with the
median cubital vein, parallels the ulnar vein, and
continues into the upper arm; along with the
brachial vein, it leads to the axillary vein
blood colloidal osmotic pressure (BCOP)
pressure
exerted by colloids suspended in blood within a
vessel; a primary determinant is the presence of
plasma proteins
blood flow
movement of blood through a vessel,
tissue, or organ that is usually expressed in terms of
volume per unit of time
blood hydrostatic pressure
force blood exerts
against the walls of a blood vessel or heart chamber
blood islands
masses of developing blood vessels
and formed elements from mesodermal cells
scattered throughout the embryonic disc
blood pressure
force exerted by the blood against
20 • Key Terms
881
the wall of a vessel or heart chamber; can be
described with the more generic term hydrostatic
pressure
brachial artery
continuation of the axillary artery in
the brachium; supplies blood to much of the
brachial region; gives off several smaller branches
that provide blood to the posterior surface of the
arm in the region of the elbow; bifurcates into the
radial and ulnar arteries at the coronoid fossa
brachial vein
deeper vein of the arm that forms from
the radial and ulnar veins in the lower arm; leads to
the axillary vein
brachiocephalic artery
single vessel located on the
right side of the body; the first vessel branching
from the aortic arch; gives rise to the right
subclavian artery and the right common carotid
artery; supplies blood to the head, neck, upper limb,
and wall of the thoracic region
brachiocephalic vein
one of a pair of veins that form
from a fusion of the external and internal jugular
veins and the subclavian vein; subclavian, external
and internal jugulars, vertebral, and internal
thoracic veins lead to it; drains the upper thoracic
region and flows into the superior vena cava
bronchial artery
systemic branch from the aorta that
provides oxygenated blood to the lungs in addition
to the pulmonary circuit
bronchial vein
drains the systemic circulation from
the lungs and leads to the azygos vein
capacitance
ability of a vein to distend and store
blood
capacitance vessels
veins
capillary
smallest of blood vessels where physical
exchange occurs between the blood and tissue cells
surrounded by interstitial fluid
capillary bed
network of 10–100 capillaries
connecting arterioles to venules
capillary hydrostatic pressure (CHP)
force blood
exerts against a capillary
cardiogenic shock
type of shock that results from the
inability of the heart to maintain cardiac output
carotid sinuses
small pockets near the base of the
internal carotid arteries that are the locations of the
baroreceptors and chemoreceptors that trigger a
reflex that aids in the regulation of vascular
homeostasis
cavernous sinus
enlarged vein that receives blood
from most of the other cerebral veins and the eye
socket, and leads to the petrosal sinus
celiac trunk
(also, celiac artery) major branch of the
abdominal aorta; gives rise to the left gastric artery,
the splenic artery, and the common hepatic artery
that forms the hepatic artery to the liver, the right
gastric artery to the stomach, and the cystic artery
to the gall bladder
cephalic vein
superficial vessel in the upper arm;
leads to the axillary vein
cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
blockage of blood
flow to the brain; also called a stroke
circle of Willis
(also, arterial circle) anastomosis
located at the base of the brain that ensures
continual blood supply; formed from branches of
the internal carotid and vertebral arteries; supplies
blood to the brain
circulatory shock
also simply called shock; a life-
threatening medical condition in which the
circulatory system is unable to supply enough blood
flow to provide adequate oxygen and other nutrients
to the tissues to maintain cellular metabolism
common carotid artery
right common carotid artery
arises from the brachiocephalic artery, and the left
common carotid arises from the aortic arch; gives
rise to the external and internal carotid arteries;
supplies the respective sides of the head and neck
common hepatic artery
branch of the celiac trunk
that forms the hepatic artery, the right gastric artery,
and the cystic artery
common iliac artery
branch of the aorta that leads to
the internal and external iliac arteries
common iliac vein
one of a pair of veins that flows
into the inferior vena cava at the level of L5; the left
common iliac vein drains the sacral region; divides
into external and internal iliac veins near the inferior
portion of the sacroiliac joint
compliance
degree to which a blood vessel can
stretch as opposed to being rigid
continuous capillary
most common type of capillary,
found in virtually all tissues except epithelia and
cartilage; contains very small gaps in the endothelial
lining that permit exchange
cystic artery
branch of the common hepatic artery;
supplies blood to the gall bladder
deep femoral artery
branch of the femoral artery;
gives rise to the lateral circumflex arteries
deep femoral vein
drains blood from the deeper
portions of the thigh and leads to the femoral vein
descending aorta
portion of the aorta that continues
downward past the end of the aortic arch;
subdivided into the thoracic aorta and the
abdominal aorta
diastolic pressure
lower number recorded when
measuring arterial blood pressure; represents the
minimal value corresponding to the pressure that
remains during ventricular relaxation
digital arteries
formed from the superficial and deep
palmar arches; supply blood to the digits
882
20 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
digital veins
drain the digits and feed into the palmar
arches of the hand and dorsal venous arch of the
foot
dorsal arch
(also, arcuate arch) formed from the
anastomosis of the dorsalis pedis artery and medial
and plantar arteries; branches supply the distal
portions of the foot and digits
dorsal venous arch
drains blood from digital veins
and vessels on the superior surface of the foot
dorsalis pedis artery
forms from the anterior tibial
artery; branches repeatedly to supply blood to the
tarsal and dorsal regions of the foot
ductus arteriosus
shunt in the fetal pulmonary trunk
that diverts oxygenated blood back to the aorta
ductus venosus
shunt that causes oxygenated blood
to bypass the fetal liver on its way to the inferior
vena cava
elastic artery
(also, conducting artery) artery with
abundant elastic fibers located closer to the heart,
which maintains the pressure gradient and conducts
blood to smaller branches
esophageal artery
branch of the thoracic aorta;
supplies blood to the esophagus
esophageal vein
drains the inferior portions of the
esophagus and leads to the azygos vein
external carotid artery
arises from the common
carotid artery; supplies blood to numerous
structures within the face, lower jaw, neck,
esophagus, and larynx
external elastic membrane
membrane composed of
elastic fibers that separates the tunica media from
the tunica externa; seen in larger arteries
external iliac artery
branch of the common iliac
artery that leaves the body cavity and becomes a
femoral artery; supplies blood to the lower limbs
external iliac vein
formed when the femoral vein
passes into the body cavity; drains the legs and
leads to the common iliac vein
external jugular vein
one of a pair of major veins
located in the superficial neck region that drains
blood from the more superficial portions of the
head, scalp, and cranial regions, and leads to the
subclavian vein
femoral artery
continuation of the external iliac
artery after it passes through the body cavity;
divides into several smaller branches, the lateral
deep femoral artery, and the genicular artery;
becomes the popliteal artery as it passes posterior
to the knee
femoral circumflex vein
forms a loop around the
femur just inferior to the trochanters; drains blood
from the areas around the head and neck of the
femur; leads to the femoral vein
femoral vein
drains the upper leg; receives blood
from the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral
vein, and the femoral circumflex vein; becomes the
external iliac vein when it crosses the body wall
fenestrated capillary
type of capillary with pores or
fenestrations in the endothelium that allow for rapid
passage of certain small materials
fibular vein
drains the muscles and integument near
the fibula and leads to the popliteal vein
filtration
in the cardiovascular system, the movement
of material from a capillary into the interstitial fluid,
moving from an area of higher pressure to lower
pressure
foramen ovale
shunt that directly connects the right
and left atria and helps to divert oxygenated blood
from the fetal pulmonary circuit
genicular artery
branch of the femoral artery;
supplies blood to the region of the knee
gonadal artery
branch of the abdominal aorta;
supplies blood to the gonads or reproductive
organs; also described as ovarian arteries or
testicular arteries, depending upon the sex of the
individual
gonadal vein
generic term for a vein draining a
reproductive organ; may be either an ovarian vein or
a testicular vein, depending on the sex of the
individual
great cerebral vein
receives most of the smaller
vessels from the inferior cerebral veins and leads to
the straight sinus
great saphenous vein
prominent surface vessel
located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh;
drains the superficial portions of these areas and
leads to the femoral vein
hemangioblasts
embryonic stem cells that appear in
the mesoderm and give rise to both angioblasts and
pluripotent stem cells
hemiazygos vein
smaller vein complementary to the
azygos vein; drains the esophageal veins from the
esophagus and the left intercostal veins, and leads
to the brachiocephalic vein via the superior
intercostal vein
hepatic artery proper
branch of the common hepatic
artery; supplies systemic blood to the liver
hepatic portal system
specialized circulatory
pathway that carries blood from digestive organs to
the liver for processing before being sent to the
systemic circulation
hepatic vein
drains systemic blood from the liver and
flows into the inferior vena cava
hypertension
chronic and persistent blood pressure
measurements of 140/90 mm Hg or above
hypervolemia
abnormally high levels of fluid and
20 • Key Terms
883
blood within the body
hypovolemia
abnormally low levels of fluid and blood
within the body
hypovolemic shock
type of circulatory shock caused
by excessive loss of blood volume due to
hemorrhage or possibly dehydration
hypoxia
lack of oxygen supply to the tissues
inferior mesenteric artery
branch of the abdominal
aorta; supplies blood to the distal segment of the
large intestine and rectum
inferior phrenic artery
branch of the abdominal
aorta; supplies blood to the inferior surface of the
diaphragm
inferior vena cava
large systemic vein that drains
blood from areas largely inferior to the diaphragm;
empties into the right atrium
intercostal artery
branch of the thoracic aorta;
supplies blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity
and vertebral column
intercostal vein
drains the muscles of the thoracic
wall and leads to the azygos vein
internal carotid artery
arises from the common
carotid artery and begins with the carotid sinus;
goes through the carotid canal of the temporal bone
to the base of the brain; combines with branches of
the vertebral artery forming the arterial circle;
supplies blood to the brain
internal elastic membrane
membrane composed of
elastic fibers that separates the tunica intima from
the tunica media; seen in larger arteries
internal iliac artery
branch from the common iliac
arteries; supplies blood to the urinary bladder, walls
of the pelvis, external genitalia, and the medial
portion of the femoral region; in females, also
provide blood to the uterus and vagina
internal iliac vein
drains the pelvic organs and
integument; formed from several smaller veins in
the region; leads to the common iliac vein
internal jugular vein
one of a pair of major veins
located in the neck region that passes through the
jugular foramen and canal, flows parallel to the
common carotid artery that is more or less its
counterpart; primarily drains blood from the brain,
receives the superficial facial vein, and empties into
the subclavian vein
internal thoracic artery
(also, mammary artery)
arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to
the thymus, pericardium of the heart, and the
anterior chest wall
internal thoracic vein
(also, internal mammary vein)
drains the anterior surface of the chest wall and
leads to the brachiocephalic vein
interstitial fluid colloidal osmotic pressure (IFCOP)
pressure exerted by the colloids within the
interstitial fluid
interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure (IFHP)
force
exerted by the fluid in the tissue spaces
ischemia
insufficient blood flow to the tissues
Korotkoff sounds
noises created by turbulent blood
flow through the vessels
lateral circumflex artery
branch of the deep femoral
artery; supplies blood to the deep muscles of the
thigh and the ventral and lateral regions of the
integument
lateral plantar artery
arises from the bifurcation of
the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the
lateral plantar surfaces of the foot
left gastric artery
branch of the celiac trunk; supplies
blood to the stomach
lumbar arteries
branches of the abdominal aorta;
supply blood to the lumbar region, the abdominal
wall, and spinal cord
lumbar veins
drain the lumbar portion of the
abdominal wall and spinal cord; the superior lumbar
veins drain into the azygos vein on the right or the
hemiazygos vein on the left; blood from these
vessels is returned to the superior vena cava rather
than the inferior vena cava
lumen
interior of a tubular structure such as a blood
vessel or a portion of the alimentary canal through
which blood, chyme, or other substances travel
maxillary vein
drains blood from the maxillary region
and leads to the external jugular vein
mean arterial pressure (MAP)
average driving force
of blood to the tissues; approximated by taking
diastolic pressure and adding 1/3 of pulse pressure
medial plantar artery
arises from the bifurcation of
the posterior tibial arteries; supplies blood to the
medial plantar surfaces of the foot
median antebrachial vein
vein that parallels the
ulnar vein but is more medial in location; intertwines
with the palmar venous arches
median cubital vein
superficial vessel located in the
antecubital region that links the cephalic vein to the
basilic vein in the form of a v; a frequent site for a
blood draw
median sacral artery
continuation of the aorta into
the sacrum
mediastinal artery
branch of the thoracic aorta;
supplies blood to the mediastinum
metarteriole
short vessel arising from a terminal
arteriole that branches to supply a capillary bed
microcirculation
blood flow through the capillaries
middle cerebral artery
another branch of the internal
carotid artery; supplies blood to the temporal and
parietal lobes of the cerebrum
884
20 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
middle sacral vein
drains the sacral region and leads
to the left common iliac vein
muscular artery
(also, distributing artery) artery with
abundant smooth muscle in the tunica media that
branches to distribute blood to the arteriole network
myogenic response
constriction or dilation in the
walls of arterioles in response to pressures related
to blood flow; reduces high blood flow or increases
low blood flow to help maintain consistent flow to
the capillary network
nervi vasorum
small nerve fibers found in arteries
and veins that trigger contraction of the smooth
muscle in their walls
net filtration pressure (NFP)
force driving fluid out of
the capillary and into the tissue spaces; equal to the
difference of the capillary hydrostatic pressure and
the blood colloidal osmotic pressure
neurogenic shock
type of shock that occurs with
cranial or high spinal injuries that damage the
cardiovascular centers in the medulla oblongata or
the nervous fibers originating from this region
obstructive shock
type of shock that occurs when a
significant portion of the vascular system is blocked
occipital sinus
enlarged vein that drains the occipital
region near the falx cerebelli and flows into the left
and right transverse sinuses, and also into the
vertebral veins
ophthalmic artery
branch of the internal carotid
artery; supplies blood to the eyes
ovarian artery
branch of the abdominal aorta;
supplies blood to the ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube,
and uterus
ovarian vein
drains the ovary; the right ovarian vein
leads to the inferior vena cava and the left ovarian
vein leads to the left renal vein
palmar arches
superficial and deep arches formed
from anastomoses of the radial and ulnar arteries;
supply blood to the hand and digital arteries
palmar venous arches
drain the hand and digits, and
feed into the radial and ulnar veins
parietal branches
(also, somatic branches) group of
arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; includes
those that supply blood to the thoracic cavity,
vertebral column, and the superior surface of the
diaphragm
perfusion
distribution of blood into the capillaries so
the tissues can be supplied
pericardial artery
branch of the thoracic aorta;
supplies blood to the pericardium
petrosal sinus
enlarged vein that receives blood from
the cavernous sinus and flows into the internal
jugular vein
phrenic vein
drains the diaphragm; the right phrenic
vein flows into the inferior vena cava and the left
phrenic vein leads to the left renal vein
plantar arch
formed from the anastomosis of the
dorsalis pedis artery and medial and plantar
arteries; branches supply the distal portions of the
foot and digits
plantar veins
drain the foot and lead to the plantar
venous arch
plantar venous arch
formed from the plantar veins;
leads to the anterior and posterior tibial veins
through anastomoses
popliteal artery
continuation of the femoral artery
posterior to the knee; branches into the anterior and
posterior tibial arteries
popliteal vein
continuation of the femoral vein
behind the knee; drains the region behind the knee
and forms from the fusion of the fibular and anterior
and posterior tibial veins
posterior cerebral artery
branch of the basilar artery
that forms a portion of the posterior segment of the
arterial circle; supplies blood to the posterior
portion of the cerebrum and brain stem
posterior communicating artery
branch of the
posterior cerebral artery that forms part of the
posterior portion of the arterial circle; supplies
blood to the brain
posterior tibial artery
branch from the popliteal
artery that gives rise to the fibular or peroneal
artery; supplies blood to the posterior tibial region
posterior tibial vein
forms from the dorsal venous
arch; drains the area near the posterior surface of
the tibia and leads to the popliteal vein
precapillary sphincters
circular rings of smooth
muscle that surround the entrance to a capillary and
regulate blood flow into that capillary
pulmonary artery
one of two branches, left and right,
that divides off from the pulmonary trunk and leads
to smaller arterioles and eventually to the
pulmonary capillaries
pulmonary circuit
system of blood vessels that
provide gas exchange via a network of arteries,
veins, and capillaries that run from the heart,
through the body, and back to the lungs
pulmonary trunk
single large vessel exiting the right
ventricle that divides to form the right and left
pulmonary arteries
pulmonary veins
two sets of paired vessels, one pair
on each side, that are formed from the small
venules leading away from the pulmonary
capillaries that flow into the left atrium
pulse
alternating expansion and recoil of an artery as
blood moves through the vessel; an indicator of
heart rate
20 • Key Terms
885
pulse pressure
difference between the systolic and
diastolic pressures
radial artery
formed at the bifurcation of the brachial
artery; parallels the radius; gives off smaller
branches until it reaches the carpal region where it
fuses with the ulnar artery to form the superficial
and deep palmar arches; supplies blood to the
lower arm and carpal region
radial vein
parallels the radius and radial artery;
arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to
the brachial vein
reabsorption
in the cardiovascular system, the
movement of material from the interstitial fluid into
the capillaries
renal artery
branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies
each kidney
renal vein
largest vein entering the inferior vena cava;
drains the kidneys and leads to the inferior vena
cava
resistance
any condition or parameter that slows or
counteracts the flow of blood
respiratory pump
increase in the volume of the
thorax during inhalation that decreases air pressure,
enabling venous blood to flow into the thoracic
region, then exhalation increases pressure, moving
blood into the atria
right gastric artery
branch of the common hepatic
artery; supplies blood to the stomach
sepsis
(also, septicemia) organismal-level
inflammatory response to a massive infection
septic shock
(also, blood poisoning) type of shock
that follows a massive infection resulting in
organism-wide inflammation
sigmoid sinuses
enlarged veins that receive blood
from the transverse sinuses; flow through the
jugular foramen and into the internal jugular vein
sinusoid capillary
rarest type of capillary, which has
extremely large intercellular gaps in the basement
membrane in addition to clefts and fenestrations;
found in areas such as the bone marrow and liver
where passage of large molecules occurs
skeletal muscle pump
effect on increasing blood
pressure within veins by compression of the vessel
caused by the contraction of nearby skeletal muscle
small saphenous vein
located on the lateral surface
of the leg; drains blood from the superficial regions
of the lower leg and foot, and leads to the popliteal
vein
sphygmomanometer
blood pressure cuff attached to
a device that measures blood pressure
splenic artery
branch of the celiac trunk; supplies
blood to the spleen
straight sinus
enlarged vein that drains blood from
the brain; receives most of the blood from the great
cerebral vein and flows into the left or right
transverse sinus
subclavian artery
right subclavian arises from the
brachiocephalic artery, whereas the left subclavian
artery arises from the aortic arch; gives rise to the
internal thoracic, vertebral, and thyrocervical
arteries; supplies blood to the arms, chest,
shoulders, back, and central nervous system
subclavian vein
located deep in the thoracic cavity;
becomes the axillary vein as it enters the axillary
region; drains the axillary and smaller local veins
near the scapular region; leads to the
brachiocephalic vein
subscapular vein
drains blood from the subscapular
region and leads to the axillary vein
superior mesenteric artery
branch of the abdominal
aorta; supplies blood to the small intestine
(duodenum, jejunum, and ileum), the pancreas, and
a majority of the large intestine
superior phrenic artery
branch of the thoracic aorta;
supplies blood to the superior surface of the
diaphragm
superior sagittal sinus
enlarged vein located
midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal
layers of the dura mater within the falx cerebri;
receives most of the blood drained from the
superior surface of the cerebrum and leads to the
inferior jugular vein and the vertebral vein
superior vena cava
large systemic vein; drains blood
from most areas superior to the diaphragm; empties
into the right atrium
systolic pressure
larger number recorded when
measuring arterial blood pressure; represents the
maximum value following ventricular contraction
temporal vein
drains blood from the temporal region
and leads to the external jugular vein
testicular artery
branch of the abdominal aorta; will
ultimately travel outside the body cavity to the
testes and form one component of the spermatic
cord
testicular vein
drains the testes and forms part of the
spermatic cord; the right testicular vein empties
directly into the inferior vena cava and the left
testicular vein empties into the left renal vein
thoracic aorta
portion of the descending aorta
superior to the aortic hiatus
thoroughfare channel
continuation of the
metarteriole that enables blood to bypass a
capillary bed and flow directly into a venule,
creating a vascular shunt
thyrocervical artery
arises from the subclavian
artery; supplies blood to the thyroid, the cervical
886
20 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
region, the upper back, and shoulder
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
temporary loss of
neurological function caused by a brief interruption
in blood flow; also known as a mini-stroke
transverse sinuses
pair of enlarged veins near the
lambdoid suture that drain the occipital, sagittal,
and straight sinuses, and leads to the sigmoid
sinuses
trunk
large vessel that gives rise to smaller vessels
tunica externa
(also, tunica adventitia) outermost
layer or tunic of a vessel (except capillaries)
tunica intima
(also, tunica interna) innermost lining
or tunic of a vessel
tunica media
middle layer or tunic of a vessel (except
capillaries)
ulnar artery
formed at the bifurcation of the brachial
artery; parallels the ulna; gives off smaller branches
until it reaches the carpal region where it fuses with
the radial artery to form the superficial and deep
palmar arches; supplies blood to the lower arm and
carpal region
ulnar vein
parallels the ulna and ulnar artery; arises
from the palmar venous arches and leads to the
brachial vein
umbilical arteries
pair of vessels that runs within the
umbilical cord and carries fetal blood low in oxygen
and high in waste to the placenta for exchange with
maternal blood
umbilical vein
single vessel that originates in the
placenta and runs within the umbilical cord, carrying
oxygen- and nutrient-rich blood to the fetal heart
vasa vasorum
small blood vessels located within the
walls or tunics of larger vessels that supply
nourishment to and remove wastes from the cells of
the vessels
vascular shock
type of shock that occurs when
arterioles lose their normal muscular tone and
dilate dramatically
vascular shunt
continuation of the metarteriole and
thoroughfare channel that allows blood to bypass
the capillary beds to flow directly from the arterial
to the venous circulation
vascular tone
contractile state of smooth muscle in a
blood vessel
vascular tubes
rudimentary blood vessels in a
developing fetus
vasoconstriction
constriction of the smooth muscle
of a blood vessel, resulting in a decreased vascular
diameter
vasodilation
relaxation of the smooth muscle in the
wall of a blood vessel, resulting in an increased
vascular diameter
vasomotion
irregular, pulsating flow of blood through
capillaries and related structures
vein
blood vessel that conducts blood toward the
heart
venous reserve
volume of blood contained within
systemic veins in the integument, bone marrow, and
liver that can be returned to the heart for circulation,
if needed
venule
small vessel leading from the capillaries to
veins
vertebral artery
arises from the subclavian artery
and passes through the vertebral foramen through
the foramen magnum to the brain; joins with the
internal carotid artery to form the arterial circle;
supplies blood to the brain and spinal cord
vertebral vein
arises from the base of the brain and
the cervical region of the spinal cord; passes
through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical
vertebrae; drains smaller veins from the cranium,
spinal cord, and vertebrae, and leads to the
brachiocephalic vein; counterpart of the vertebral
artery
visceral branches
branches of the descending aorta
that supply blood to the viscera
Chapter Review
20.1 Structure and Function of Blood
Vessels
Blood pumped by the heart flows through a series of
vessels known as arteries, arterioles, capillaries,
venules, and veins before returning to the heart.
Arteries transport blood away from the heart and
branch into smaller vessels, forming arterioles.
Arterioles distribute blood to capillary beds, the sites
of exchange with the body tissues. Capillaries lead
back to small vessels known as venules that flow into
the larger veins and eventually back to the heart.
The arterial system is a relatively high-pressure
system, so arteries have thick walls that appear round
in cross section. The venous system is a lower-
pressure system, containing veins that have larger
lumens and thinner walls. They often appear flattened.
Arteries, arterioles, venules, and veins are composed
of three tunics known as the tunica intima, tunica
media, and tunica externa. Capillaries have only a
tunica intima layer. The tunica intima is a thin layer
composed of a simple squamous epithelium known as
endothelium and a small amount of connective tissue.
The tunica media is a thicker area composed of
variable amounts of smooth muscle and connective
tissue. It is the thickest layer in all but the largest
20 • Chapter Review
887
arteries. The tunica externa is primarily a layer of
connective tissue, although in veins, it also contains
some smooth muscle. Blood flow through vessels can
be dramatically influenced by vasoconstriction and
vasodilation in their walls.
20.2 Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and
Resistance
Blood flow is the movement of blood through a vessel,
tissue, or organ. The slowing or blocking of blood flow
is called resistance. Blood pressure is the force that
blood exerts upon the walls of the blood vessels or
chambers of the heart. The components of blood
pressure include systolic pressure, which results from
ventricular contraction, and diastolic pressure, which
results from ventricular relaxation. Pulse pressure is
the difference between systolic and diastolic
measures, and mean arterial pressure is the “average”
pressure of blood in the arterial system, driving blood
into the tissues. Pulse, the expansion and recoiling of
an artery, reflects the heartbeat. The variables
affecting blood flow and blood pressure in the systemic
circulation are cardiac output, compliance, blood
volume, blood viscosity, and the length and diameter of
the blood vessels. In the arterial system, vasodilation
and vasoconstriction of the arterioles is a significant
factor in systemic blood pressure: Slight vasodilation
greatly decreases resistance and increases flow,
whereas slight vasoconstriction greatly increases
resistance and decreases flow. In the arterial system,
as resistance increases, blood pressure increases and
flow decreases. In the venous system, constriction
increases blood pressure as it does in arteries; the
increasing pressure helps to return blood to the heart.
In addition, constriction causes the vessel lumen to
become more rounded, decreasing resistance and
increasing blood flow. Venoconstriction, while less
important than arterial vasoconstriction, works with
the skeletal muscle pump, the respiratory pump, and
their valves to promote venous return to the heart.
20.3 Capillary Exchange
Small molecules can cross into and out of capillaries
via simple or facilitated diffusion. Some large
molecules can cross in vesicles or through clefts,
fenestrations, or gaps between cells in capillary walls.
However, the bulk flow of capillary and tissue fluid
occurs via filtration and reabsorption. Filtration, the
movement of fluid out of the capillaries, is driven by the
CHP. Reabsorption, the influx of tissue fluid into the
capillaries, is driven by the BCOP. Filtration
predominates in the arterial end of the capillary; in the
middle section, the opposing pressures are virtually
identical so there is no net exchange, whereas
reabsorption predominates at the venule end of the
capillary. The hydrostatic and colloid osmotic
pressures in the interstitial fluid are negligible in
healthy circumstances.
20.4 Homeostatic Regulation of the
Vascular System
Neural, endocrine, and autoregulatory mechanisms
affect blood flow, blood pressure, and eventually
perfusion of blood to body tissues. Neural mechanisms
include the cardiovascular centers in the medulla
oblongata, baroreceptors in the aorta and carotid
arteries and right atrium, and associated
chemoreceptors that monitor blood levels of oxygen,
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen ions. Endocrine controls
include epinephrine and norepinephrine, as well as
ADH, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism,
ANH, and EPO. Autoregulation is the local control of
vasodilation and constriction by chemical signals and
the myogenic response. Exercise greatly improves
cardiovascular function and reduces the risk of
cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, a
leading cause of heart attacks and strokes. Significant
hemorrhage can lead to a form of circulatory shock
known as hypovolemic shock. Sepsis, obstruction, and
widespread inflammation can also cause circulatory
shock.
20.5 Circulatory Pathways
The right ventricle pumps oxygen-depleted blood into
the pulmonary trunk and right and left pulmonary
arteries, which carry it to the right and left lungs for gas
exchange. Oxygen-rich blood is transported by
pulmonary veins to the left atrium. The left ventricle
pumps this blood into the aorta. The main regions of
the aorta are the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and
descending aorta, which is further divided into the
thoracic and abdominal aorta. The coronary arteries
branch from the ascending aorta. After oxygenating
tissues in the capillaries, systemic blood is returned to
the right atrium from the venous system via the
superior vena cava, which drains most of the veins
superior to the diaphragm, the inferior vena cava,
which drains most of the veins inferior to the
diaphragm, and the coronary veins via the coronary
sinus. The hepatic portal system carries blood to the
liver for processing before it enters circulation. Review
the figures provided in this section for circulation of
blood through the blood vessels.
888
20 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
20.6 Development of Blood Vessels and
Fetal Circulation
Blood vessels begin to form from the embryonic
mesoderm. The precursor hemangioblasts differentiate
into angioblasts, which give rise to the blood vessels
and pluripotent stem cells that differentiate into the
formed elements of the blood. Together, these cells
form blood islands scattered throughout the embryo.
Extensions known as vascular tubes eventually
connect the vascular network. As the embryo grows
within the mother’s womb, the placenta develops to
supply blood rich in oxygen and nutrients via the
umbilical vein and to remove wastes in oxygen-
depleted blood via the umbilical arteries. Three major
shunts found in the fetus are the foramen ovale and
ductus arteriosus, which divert blood from the
pulmonary to the systemic circuit, and the ductus
venosus, which carries freshly oxygenated blood high
in nutrients to the fetal heart.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
capillaryfunct) to explore capillaries and how they
function in the body. Capillaries are never more
than 100 micrometers away. What is the main
component of interstitial fluid?
2. Listen to this CDC podcast (http://openstax.org/l/
CDCpodcast) to learn about hypertension, often
described as a “silent killer.” What steps can you
take to reduce your risk of a heart attack or stroke?
Review Questions
3. The endothelium is found in the ________.
a.
tunica intima
b.
tunica media
c.
tunica externa
d.
lumen
4. Nervi vasorum control ________.
a.
vasoconstriction
b.
vasodilation
c.
capillary permeability
d.
both vasoconstriction and vasodilation
5. Closer to the heart, arteries would be expected to
have a higher percentage of ________.
a.
endothelium
b.
smooth muscle fibers
c.
elastic fibers
d.
collagenous fibers
6. Which of the following best describes veins?
a.
thick walled, small lumens, low pressure, lack
valves
b.
thin walled, large lumens, low pressure, have
valves
c.
thin walled, small lumens, high pressure, have
valves
d.
thick walled, large lumens, high pressure, lack
valves
7. An especially leaky type of capillary found in the
liver and certain other tissues is called a ________.
a.
capillary bed
b.
fenestrated capillary
c.
sinusoid capillary
d.
metarteriole
8. In a blood pressure measurement of 110/70, the
number 70 is the ________.
a.
systolic pressure
b.
diastolic pressure
c.
pulse pressure
d.
mean arterial pressure
9. A healthy elastic artery ________.
a.
is compliant
b.
reduces blood flow
c.
is a resistance artery
d.
has a thin wall and irregular lumen
10. Which of the following statements is true?
a.
The longer the vessel, the lower the
resistance and the greater the flow.
b.
As blood volume decreases, blood pressure
and blood flow also decrease.
c.
Increased viscosity increases blood flow.
d.
All of the above are true.
11. Slight vasodilation in an arteriole prompts a
________.
a.
slight increase in resistance
b.
huge increase in resistance
c.
slight decrease in resistance
d.
huge decrease in resistance
12. Venoconstriction increases which of the following?
a.
blood pressure within the vein
b.
blood flow within the vein
c.
return of blood to the heart
d.
all of the above
20 • Interactive Link Questions
889
13. Hydrostatic pressure is ________.
a.
greater than colloid osmotic pressure at the
venous end of the capillary bed
b.
the pressure exerted by fluid in an enclosed
space
c.
about zero at the midpoint of a capillary bed
d.
all of the above
14. Net filtration pressure is calculated by ________.
a.
adding the capillary hydrostatic pressure to
the interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure
b.
subtracting the fluid drained by the lymphatic
vessels from the total fluid in the interstitial
fluid
c.
adding the blood colloid osmotic pressure to
the capillary hydrostatic pressure
d.
subtracting the blood colloid osmotic
pressure from the capillary hydrostatic
pressure
15. Which of the following statements is true?
a.
In one day, more fluid exits the capillary
through filtration than enters through
reabsorption.
b.
In one day, approximately 35 mm of blood are
filtered and 7 mm are reabsorbed.
c.
In one day, the capillaries of the lymphatic
system absorb about 20.4 liters of fluid.
d.
None of the above are true.
16. Clusters of neurons in the medulla oblongata that
regulate blood pressure are known collectively as
________.
a.
baroreceptors
b.
angioreceptors
c.
the cardiomotor mechanism
d.
the cardiovascular center
17. In the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism,
________.
a.
decreased blood pressure prompts the
release of renin from the liver
b.
aldosterone prompts increased urine output
c.
aldosterone prompts the kidneys to reabsorb
sodium
d.
all of the above
18. In the myogenic response, ________.
a.
muscle contraction promotes venous return
to the heart
b.
ventricular contraction strength is decreased
c.
vascular smooth muscle responds to stretch
d.
endothelins dilate muscular arteries
19. A form of circulatory shock common in young
children with severe diarrhea or vomiting is
________.
a.
hypovolemic shock
b.
anaphylactic shock
c.
obstructive shock
d.
hemorrhagic shock
20. The coronary arteries branch off of the ________.
a.
aortic valve
b.
ascending aorta
c.
aortic arch
d.
thoracic aorta
21. Which of the following statements is true?
a.
The left and right common carotid arteries
both branch off of the brachiocephalic trunk.
b.
The brachial artery is the distal branch of the
axillary artery.
c.
The radial and ulnar arteries join to form the
palmar arch.
d.
All of the above are true.
22. Arteries serving the stomach, pancreas, and liver
all branch from the ________.
a.
superior mesenteric artery
b.
inferior mesenteric artery
c.
celiac trunk
d.
splenic artery
23. The right and left brachiocephalic veins ________.
a.
drain blood from the right and left internal
jugular veins
b.
drain blood from the right and left subclavian
veins
c.
drain into the superior vena cava
d.
all of the above are true
24. The hepatic portal system delivers blood from the
digestive organs to the ________.
a.
liver
b.
hypothalamus
c.
spleen
d.
left atrium
25. Blood islands are ________.
a.
clusters of blood-filtering cells in the placenta
b.
masses of pluripotent stem cells scattered
throughout the fetal bone marrow
c.
vascular tubes that give rise to the embryonic
tubular heart
d.
masses of developing blood vessels and
formed elements scattered throughout the
embryonic disc
890
20 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
26. Which of the following statements is true?
a.
Two umbilical veins carry oxygen-depleted
blood from the fetal circulation to the
placenta.
b.
One umbilical vein carries oxygen-rich blood
from the placenta to the fetal heart.
c.
Two umbilical arteries carry oxygen-depleted
blood to the fetal lungs.
d.
None of the above are true.
27. The ductus venosus is a shunt that allows
________.
a.
fetal blood to flow from the right atrium to the
left atrium
b.
fetal blood to flow from the right ventricle to
the left ventricle
c.
most freshly oxygenated blood to flow into
the fetal heart
d.
most oxygen-depleted fetal blood to flow
directly into the fetal pulmonary trunk
Critical Thinking Questions
28. Arterioles are often referred to as resistance
vessels. Why?
29. Cocaine use causes vasoconstriction. Is this likely
to increase or decrease blood pressure, and why?
30. A blood vessel with a few smooth muscle fibers
and connective tissue, and only a very thin tunica
externa conducts blood toward the heart. What
type of vessel is this?
31. You measure a patient’s blood pressure at 130/
85. Calculate the patient’s pulse pressure and
mean arterial pressure. Determine whether each
pressure is low, normal, or high.
32. An obese patient comes to the clinic complaining
of swollen feet and ankles, fatigue, shortness of
breath, and often feeling “spaced out.” She is a
cashier in a grocery store, a job that requires her
to stand all day. Outside of work, she engages in
no physical activity. She confesses that, because
of her weight, she finds even walking
uncomfortable. Explain how the skeletal muscle
pump might play a role in this patient’s signs and
symptoms.
33. A patient arrives at the emergency department
with dangerously low blood pressure. The
patient’s blood colloid osmotic pressure is normal.
How would you expect this situation to affect the
patient’s net filtration pressure?
34. True or false? The plasma proteins suspended in
blood cross the capillary cell membrane and enter
the tissue fluid via facilitated diffusion. Explain
your thinking.
35. A patient arrives in the emergency department
with a blood pressure of 70/45 confused and
complaining of thirst. Why?
36. Nitric oxide is broken down very quickly after its
release. Why?
37. Identify the ventricle of the heart that pumps
oxygen-depleted blood and the arteries of the
body that carry oxygen-depleted blood.
38. What organs do the gonadal veins drain?
39. What arteries play the leading roles in supplying
blood to the brain?
40. All tissues, including malignant tumors, need a
blood supply. Explain why drugs called
angiogenesis inhibitors would be used in cancer
treatment.
41. Explain the location and importance of the ductus
arteriosus in fetal circulation.
20 • Critical Thinking Questions
891
892
20 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 21
The Lymphatic and Immune System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the components and anatomy of the lymphatic system
•
Discuss the role of the innate immune response against pathogens
•
Describe the power of the adaptive immune response to cure disease
•
Explain immunological deficiencies and over-reactions of the immune system
•
Discuss the role of the immune response in transplantation and cancer
•
Describe the interaction of the immune and lymphatic systems with other body systems
In June 1981, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in Atlanta, Georgia,
published a report of an unusual cluster of five patients in Los Angeles, California. All five were diagnosed with a rare
pneumonia caused by a fungus called Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii).
Why was this unusual? Although commonly found in the lungs of healthy individuals, this fungus is an opportunistic
pathogen that causes disease in individuals with suppressed or underdeveloped immune systems. The very young,
whose immune systems have yet to mature, and the elderly, whose immune systems have declined with age, are
particularly susceptible. The five patients from LA, though, were between 29 and 36 years of age and should have
been in the prime of their lives, immunologically speaking. What could be going on?
A few days later, a cluster of eight cases was reported in New York City, also involving young patients, this time
exhibiting a rare form of skin cancer known as Kaposi’s sarcoma. This cancer of the cells that line the blood and
lymphatic vessels was previously observed as a relatively innocuous disease of the elderly. The disease that doctors
saw in 1981 was frighteningly more severe, with multiple, fast-growing lesions that spread to all parts of the body,
including the trunk and face. Could the immune systems of these young patients have been compromised in some
way? Indeed, when they were tested, they exhibited extremely low numbers of a specific type of white blood cell in
their bloodstreams, indicating that they had somehow lost a major part of the immune system.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS, turned out to be a new disease caused by the previously unknown
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Although nearly 100 percent fatal in those with active HIV infections in the
early years, the development of anti-HIV drugs has transformed HIV infection into a chronic, manageable disease
and not the certain death sentence it once was. One positive outcome resulting from the emergence of HIV disease
was that the public’s attention became focused as never before on the importance of having a functional and
healthy immune system.
Figure 21.1
The Worldwide AIDS Epidemic (a) As of 2008, more than 15 percent of adults were infected with HIV in certain African
countries. This grim picture had changed little by 2012. (b) In this scanning electron micrograph, HIV virions (green particles) are budding
off the surface of a macrophage (pink structure). (credit b: C. Goldsmith)
21.1 Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the lymphatic tissue (lymph fluid, vessels, ducts, and organs)
•
Describe the structure and function of the primary and secondary lymphatic organs
•
Discuss the cells of the immune system, how they function, and their relationship with the lymphatic system
The immune system is the complex collection of cells and organs that destroys or neutralizes pathogens that would
otherwise cause disease or death. The lymphatic system, for most people, is associated with the immune system to
such a degree that the two systems are virtually indistinguishable. The lymphatic system is the system of vessels,
cells, and organs that carries excess fluids to the bloodstream and filters pathogens from the blood. The swelling of
lymph nodes during an infection and the transport of lymphocytes via the lymphatic vessels are but two examples of
the many connections between these critical organ systems.
Functions of the Lymphatic System
A major function of the lymphatic system is to drain body fluids and return them to the bloodstream. Blood pressure
causes leakage of fluid from the capillaries, resulting in the accumulation of fluid in the interstitial space—that is,
spaces between individual cells in the tissues. In humans, 20 liters of plasma is released into the interstitial space
of the tissues each day due to capillary filtration. Once this filtrate is out of the bloodstream and in the tissue
spaces, it is referred to as interstitial fluid. Of this, 17 liters is reabsorbed directly by the blood vessels. But what
happens to the remaining three liters? This is where the lymphatic system comes into play. It drains the excess fluid
and empties it back into the bloodstream via a series of vessels, trunks, and ducts. Lymph is the term used to
describe interstitial fluid once it has entered the lymphatic system. When the lymphatic system is damaged in some
way, such as by being blocked by cancer cells or destroyed by injury, protein-rich interstitial fluid accumulates
(sometimes “backs up” from the lymph vessels) in the tissue spaces. This inappropriate accumulation of fluid
referred to as lymphedema may lead to serious medical consequences.
As the vertebrate immune system evolved, the network of lymphatic vessels became convenient avenues for
transporting the cells of the immune system. Additionally, the transport of dietary lipids and fat-soluble vitamins
absorbed in the gut uses this system.
Cells of the immune system not only use lymphatic vessels to make their way from interstitial spaces back into the
circulation, but they also use lymph nodes as major staging areas for the development of critical immune responses.
A lymph node is one of the small, bean-shaped organs located throughout the lymphatic system.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/lymphsystem) for an overview of the lymphatic system. What are the three
main components of the lymphatic system?
Structure of the Lymphatic System
The lymphatic vessels begin as a blind ending, or closed at one end, capillaries, which feed into larger and larger
lymphatic vessels, and eventually empty into the bloodstream by a series of ducts. Along the way, the lymph travels
through the lymph nodes, which are commonly found near the groin, armpits, neck, chest, and abdomen. Humans
have about 500–600 lymph nodes throughout the body (Figure 21.2).
894
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
21.1 • Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
895
FIGURE 21.2
Anatomy of the Lymphatic System
Lymphatic vessels in the arms and legs convey lymph to the larger lymphatic vessels
in the torso.
A major distinction between the lymphatic and cardiovascular systems in humans is that lymph is not actively
pumped by the heart, but is forced through the vessels by the movements of the body, the contraction of skeletal
muscles during body movements, and breathing. One-way valves (semi-lunar valves) in lymphatic vessels keep the
lymph moving toward the heart. Lymph flows from the lymphatic capillaries, through lymphatic vessels, and then is
dumped into the circulatory system via the lymphatic ducts located at the junction of the jugular and subclavian
veins in the neck.
Lymphatic Capillaries
Lymphatic capillaries, also called the terminal lymphatics, are vessels where interstitial fluid enters the lymphatic
system to become lymph fluid. Located in almost every tissue in the body, these vessels are interlaced among the
arterioles and venules of the circulatory system in the soft connective tissues of the body (Figure 21.3). Exceptions
are the central nervous system, bone marrow, bones, teeth, and the cornea of the eye, which do not contain lymph
vessels.
FIGURE 21.3
Lymphatic Capillaries
Lymphatic capillaries are interlaced with the arterioles and venules of the cardiovascular system.
Collagen fibers anchor a lymphatic capillary in the tissue (inset). Interstitial fluid slips through spaces between the overlapping endothelial
cells that compose the lymphatic capillary.
Lymphatic capillaries are formed by a one cell-thick layer of endothelial cells and represent the open end of the
system, allowing interstitial fluid to flow into them via overlapping cells (see Figure 21.3). When interstitial pressure
is low, the endothelial flaps close to prevent “backflow.” As interstitial pressure increases, the spaces between the
cells open up, allowing the fluid to enter. Entry of fluid into lymphatic capillaries is also enabled by the collagen
filaments that anchor the capillaries to surrounding structures. As interstitial pressure increases, the filaments pull
on the endothelial cell flaps, opening up them even further to allow easy entry of fluid.
In the small intestine, lymphatic capillaries called lacteals are critical for the transport of dietary lipids and lipid-
soluble vitamins to the bloodstream. In the small intestine, dietary triglycerides combine with other lipids and
proteins, and enter the lacteals to form a milky fluid called chyle. The chyle then travels through the lymphatic
system, eventually entering the bloodstream.
Larger Lymphatic Vessels, Trunks, and Ducts
The lymphatic capillaries empty into larger lymphatic vessels, which are similar to veins in terms of their three-tunic
structure and the presence of valves. These one-way valves are located fairly close to one another, and each one
causes a bulge in the lymphatic vessel, giving the vessels a beaded appearance (see Figure 21.3).
The superficial and deep lymphatics eventually merge to form larger lymphatic vessels known as lymphatic trunks.
On the right side of the body, the right sides of the head, thorax, and right upper limb drain lymph fluid into the right
subclavian vein via the right lymphatic duct (Figure 21.4). On the left side of the body, the remaining portions of the
896
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
body drain into the larger thoracic duct, which drains into the left subclavian vein. The thoracic duct itself begins just
beneath the diaphragm in the cisterna chyli, a sac-like chamber that receives lymph from the lower abdomen,
pelvis, and lower limbs by way of the left and right lumbar trunks and the intestinal trunk.
FIGURE 21.4
Major Trunks and Ducts of the Lymphatic System
The thoracic duct drains a much larger portion of the body than does
the right lymphatic duct.
The overall drainage system of the body is asymmetrical (see Figure 21.4). The right lymphatic duct receives lymph
from only the upper right side of the body. The lymph from the rest of the body enters the bloodstream through the
thoracic duct via all the remaining lymphatic trunks. In general, lymphatic vessels of the subcutaneous tissues of
the skin, that is, the superficial lymphatics, follow the same routes as veins, whereas the deep lymphatic vessels of
the viscera generally follow the paths of arteries.
The Organization of Immune Function
The immune system is a collection of barriers, cells, and soluble proteins that interact and communicate with each
other in extraordinarily complex ways. The modern model of immune function is organized into three phases based
on the timing of their effects. The three temporal phases consist of the following:
•
Barrier defenses such as the skin and mucous membranes, which act instantaneously to prevent pathogenic
invasion into the body tissues
•
The rapid but nonspecific innate immune response, which consists of a variety of specialized cells and soluble
factors
•
The slower but more specific and effective adaptive immune response, which involves many cell types and
soluble factors, but is primarily controlled by white blood cells (leukocytes) known as lymphocytes, which help
control immune responses
The cells of the blood, including all those involved in the immune response, arise in the bone marrow via various
differentiation pathways from hematopoietic stem cells (Figure 21.5). In contrast with embryonic stem cells,
hematopoietic stem cells are present throughout adulthood and allow for the continuous differentiation of blood
cells to replace those lost to age or function. These cells can be divided into three classes based on function:
•
Phagocytic cells, which ingest pathogens to destroy them
•
Lymphocytes, which specifically coordinate the activities of adaptive immunity
•
Cells containing cytoplasmic granules, which help mediate immune responses against parasites and
21.1 • Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
897
intracellular pathogens such as viruses
FIGURE 21.5
Hematopoietic System of the Bone Marrow
All the cells of the immune response as well as of the blood arise by
differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells. Platelets are cell fragments involved in the clotting of blood.
Lymphocytes: B Cells, T Cells, Plasma Cells, and Natural Killer Cells
As stated above, lymphocytes are the primary cells of adaptive immune responses (Table 21.1). The two basic types
of lymphocytes, B cells and T cells, are identical morphologically with a large central nucleus surrounded by a thin
layer of cytoplasm. They are distinguished from each other by their surface protein markers as well as by the
molecules they secrete. While B cells mature in red bone marrow and T cells mature in the thymus, they both
initially develop from bone marrow. T cells migrate from bone marrow to the thymus gland where they further
mature. B cells and T cells are found in many parts of the body, circulating in the bloodstream and lymph, and
residing in secondary lymphoid organs, including the spleen and lymph nodes, which will be described later in this
section. The human body contains approximately 1012 lymphocytes.
B Cells
B cells are immune cells that function primarily by producing antibodies. An antibody is any of the group of proteins
that binds specifically to pathogen-associated molecules known as antigens. An antigen is a chemical structure on
the surface of a pathogen that binds to T or B lymphocyte antigen receptors. Once activated by binding to antigen, B
cells differentiate into cells that secrete a soluble form of their surface antibodies. These activated B cells are
known as plasma cells.
T Cells
The T cell, on the other hand, does not secrete antibody but performs a variety of functions in the adaptive immune
response. Different T cell types have the ability to either secrete soluble factors that communicate with other cells
of the adaptive immune response or destroy cells infected with intracellular pathogens. The roles of T and B
898
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
lymphocytes in the adaptive immune response will be discussed further in this chapter.
Plasma Cells
Another type of lymphocyte of importance is the plasma cell. A plasma cell is a B cell that has differentiated in
response to antigen binding, and has thereby gained the ability to secrete soluble antibodies. These cells differ in
morphology from standard B and T cells in that they contain a large amount of cytoplasm packed with the protein-
synthesizing machinery known as rough endoplasmic reticulum.
Natural Killer Cells
A fourth important lymphocyte is the natural killer cell, a participant in the innate immune response. A natural killer
cell (NK) is a circulating blood cell that contains cytotoxic (cell-killing) granules in its extensive cytoplasm. It shares
this mechanism with the cytotoxic T cells of the adaptive immune response. NK cells are among the body’s first lines
of defense against viruses and certain types of cancer.
Lymphocytes
Type of lymphocyte
Primary function
B lymphocyte
Generates diverse antibodies
T lymphocyte
Secretes chemical messengers
Plasma cell
Secretes antibodies
NK cell
Destroys virally infected cells
TABLE 21.1
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/immunecells) to learn about the many different cell types in the immune
system and their very specialized jobs. What is the role of the dendritic cell in an HIV infection?
Primary Lymphoid Organs and Lymphocyte Development
Understanding the differentiation and development of B and T cells is critical to the understanding of the adaptive
immune response. It is through this process that the body (ideally) learns to destroy only pathogens and leaves the
body’s own cells relatively intact. The primary lymphoid organs are the bone marrow and thymus gland. The
lymphoid organs are where lymphocytes mature, proliferate, and are selected, which enables them to attack
pathogens without harming the cells of the body.
Bone Marrow
In the embryo, blood cells are made in the yolk sac. As development proceeds, this function is taken over by the
spleen, lymph nodes, and liver. Later, the bone marrow takes over most hematopoietic functions, although the final
stages of the differentiation of some cells may take place in other organs. The red bone marrow is a loose collection
of cells where hematopoiesis occurs, and the yellow bone marrow is a site of energy storage, which consists largely
of fat cells (Figure 21.6). The B cell undergoes nearly all of its development in the red bone marrow, whereas the
immature T cell, called a thymocyte, leaves the bone marrow and matures largely in the thymus gland.
21.1 • Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
899
FIGURE 21.6
Bone Marrow
Red bone marrow fills the head of the femur, and a spot of yellow bone marrow is visible in the center. The
white reference bar is 1 cm.
Thymus
The thymus gland is a bilobed organ found in the space between the sternum and the aorta of the heart (Figure
21.7). Connective tissue holds the lobes closely together but also separates them and forms a capsule.
FIGURE 21.7
Location, Structure, and Histology of the Thymus
The thymus lies above the heart. The trabeculae and lobules,
including the darkly staining cortex and the lighter staining medulla of each lobule, are clearly visible in the light micrograph of the thymus
of a newborn. LM × 100. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/thymusMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
The connective tissue capsule further divides the thymus into lobules via extensions called trabeculae. The outer
region of the organ is known as the cortex and contains large numbers of thymocytes with some epithelial cells,
macrophages, and dendritic cells (two types of phagocytic cells that are derived from monocytes). The cortex is
900
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
densely packed so it stains more intensely than the rest of the thymus (see Figure 21.7). The medulla, where
thymocytes migrate before leaving the thymus, contains a less dense collection of thymocytes, epithelial cells, and
dendritic cells.
Secondary Lymphoid Organs and their Roles in Active Immune Responses
Lymphocytes develop and mature in the primary lymphoid organs, but they mount immune responses from the
secondary lymphoid organs. A naïve lymphocyte is one that has left the primary organ and entered a secondary
lymphoid organ. Naïve lymphocytes are fully functional immunologically, but have yet to encounter an antigen to
respond to. In addition to circulating in the blood and lymph, lymphocytes concentrate in secondary lymphoid
organs, which include the lymph nodes, spleen, and lymphoid nodules. All of these tissues have many features in
common, including the following:
•
The presence of lymphoid follicles, the sites of the formation of lymphocytes, with specific B cell-rich and T cell-
rich areas
•
An internal structure of reticular fibers with associated fixed macrophages
•
Germinal centers, which are the sites of rapidly dividing and differentiating B lymphocytes
•
Specialized post-capillary vessels known as high endothelial venules; the cells lining these venules are thicker
and more columnar than normal endothelial cells, which allow cells from the blood to directly enter these
tissues
Lymph Nodes
Lymph nodes function to remove debris and pathogens from the lymph, and are thus sometimes referred to as the
“filters of the lymph” (Figure 21.8). Any bacteria that infect the interstitial fluid are taken up by the lymphatic
capillaries and transported to a regional lymph node. Dendritic cells and macrophages within this organ internalize
and kill many of the pathogens that pass through, thereby removing them from the body. The lymph node is also the
Aging and the...
Immune System
By the year 2050, 25 percent of the population of the United States will be 60 years of age or older. The CDC
estimates that 80 percent of those 60 years and older have one or more chronic disease associated with
deficiencies of the immune systems. This loss of immune function with age is called immunosenescence. To
treat this growing population, medical professionals must better understand the aging process. One major cause
of age-related immune deficiencies is thymic involution, the shrinking of the thymus gland that begins at birth, at
a rate of about three percent tissue loss per year, and continues until 35–45 years of age, when the rate declines
to about one percent loss per year for the rest of one’s life. At that pace, the total loss of thymic epithelial tissue
and thymocytes would occur at about 120 years of age. Thus, this age is a theoretical limit to a healthy human
lifespan.
Thymic involution has been observed in all vertebrate species that have a thymus gland. Animal studies have
shown that transplanted thymic grafts between inbred strains of mice involuted according to the age of the
donor and not of the recipient, implying the process is genetically programmed. There is evidence that the
thymic microenvironment, so vital to the development of naïve T cells, loses thymic epithelial cells according to
the decreasing expression of the FOXN1 gene with age.
It is also known that thymic involution can be altered by hormone levels. Sex hormones such as estrogen and
testosterone enhance involution, and the hormonal changes in pregnant people cause a temporary thymic
involution that reverses itself, when the size of the thymus and its hormone levels return to normal, usually after
lactation ceases. What does all this tell us? Can we reverse immunosenescence, or at least slow it down? The
potential is there for using thymic transplants from younger donors to keep thymic output of naïve T cells high.
Gene therapies that target gene expression are also seen as future possibilities. The more we learn through
immunosenescence research, the more opportunities there will be to develop therapies, even though these
therapies will likely take decades to develop. The ultimate goal is for everyone to live and be healthy longer, but
there may be limits to immortality imposed by our genes and hormones.
21.1 • Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
901
site of adaptive immune responses mediated by T cells, B cells, and accessory cells of the adaptive immune system.
Like the thymus, the bean-shaped lymph nodes are surrounded by a tough capsule of connective tissue and are
separated into compartments by trabeculae, the extensions of the capsule. In addition to the structure provided by
the capsule and trabeculae, the structural support of the lymph node is provided by a series of reticular fibers laid
down by fibroblasts.
FIGURE 21.8
Structure and Histology of a Lymph Node
Lymph nodes are masses of lymphatic tissue located along the larger lymph
vessels. The micrograph of the lymph nodes shows a germinal center, which consists of rapidly dividing B cells surrounded by a layer of T
cells and other accessory cells. LM × 128. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/lymphnodeMG) to explore the tissue sample in
greater detail.
The major routes into the lymph node are via afferent lymphatic vessels (see Figure 21.8). Cells and lymph fluid
that leave the lymph node may do so by another set of vessels known as the efferent lymphatic vessels. Lymph
enters the lymph node via the subcapsular sinus, which is occupied by dendritic cells, macrophages, and reticular
fibers. Within the cortex of the lymph node are lymphoid follicles, which consist of germinal centers of rapidly
dividing B cells surrounded by a layer of T cells and other accessory cells. As the lymph continues to flow through
the node, it enters the medulla, which consists of medullary cords of B cells and plasma cells, and the medullary
sinuses where the lymph collects before leaving the node via the efferent lymphatic vessels.
Spleen
In addition to the lymph nodes, the spleen is a major secondary lymphoid organ (Figure 21.9). It is about 12 cm (5
in) long and is attached to the lateral border of the stomach via the gastrosplenic ligament. The spleen is a fragile
organ without a strong capsule, and is dark red due to its extensive vascularization. The spleen is sometimes called
the “filter of the blood” because of its extensive vascularization and the presence of macrophages and dendritic
cells that remove microbes and other materials from the blood, including dying red blood cells. The spleen also
functions as the location of immune responses to blood-borne pathogens.
902
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.9
Spleen
(a) The spleen is attached to the stomach. (b) A micrograph of spleen tissue shows the germinal center. The
marginal zone is the region between the red pulp and white pulp, which sequesters particulate antigens from the circulation and presents
these antigens to lymphocytes in the white pulp. EM × 660. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
The spleen is also divided by trabeculae of connective tissue, and within each splenic nodule is an area of red pulp,
consisting of mostly red blood cells, and white pulp, which resembles the lymphoid follicles of the lymph nodes.
Upon entering the spleen, the splenic artery splits into several arterioles (surrounded by white pulp) and eventually
into sinusoids. Blood from the capillaries subsequently collects in the venous sinuses and leaves via the splenic
vein. The red pulp consists of reticular fibers with fixed macrophages attached, free macrophages, and all of the
other cells typical of the blood, including some lymphocytes. The white pulp surrounds a central arteriole and
consists of germinal centers of dividing B cells surrounded by T cells and accessory cells, including macrophages
and dendritic cells. Thus, the red pulp primarily functions as a filtration system of the blood, using cells of the
relatively nonspecific immune response, and white pulp is where adaptive T and B cell responses are mounted.
Lymphoid Nodules
The other lymphoid tissues, the lymphoid nodules, have a simpler architecture than the spleen and lymph nodes in
that they consist of a dense cluster of lymphocytes without a surrounding fibrous capsule. These nodules are
located in the respiratory and digestive tracts, areas routinely exposed to environmental pathogens.
Tonsils are lymphoid nodules located along the inner surface of the pharynx and are important in developing
immunity to oral pathogens (Figure 21.10). The tonsil located at the back of the throat, the pharyngeal tonsil, is
sometimes referred to as the adenoid when swollen. Such swelling is an indication of an active immune response to
infection. Histologically, tonsils do not contain a complete capsule, and the epithelial layer invaginates deeply into
the interior of the tonsil to form tonsillar crypts. These structures, which accumulate all sorts of materials taken into
the body through eating and breathing, actually “encourage” pathogens to penetrate deep into the tonsillar tissues
where they are acted upon by numerous lymphoid follicles and eliminated. This seems to be the major function of
21.1 • Anatomy of the Lymphatic and Immune Systems
903
tonsils—to help children’s bodies recognize, destroy, and develop immunity to common environmental pathogens so
that they will be protected in their later lives. Tonsils are often removed in those children who have recurring throat
infections, especially those involving the palatine tonsils on either side of the throat, whose swelling may interfere
with their breathing and/or swallowing.
FIGURE 21.10
Locations and Histology of the Tonsils
(a) The pharyngeal tonsil is located on the roof of the posterior superior wall of
the nasopharynx. The palatine tonsils lay on each side of the pharynx. (b) A micrograph shows the palatine tonsil tissue. LM × 40.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/tonsilMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) consists of an aggregate of lymphoid follicles directly associated with
the mucous membrane epithelia. MALT makes up dome-shaped structures found underlying the mucosa of the
gastrointestinal tract, breast tissue, lungs, and eyes. Peyer’s patches, a type of MALT in the small intestine, are
especially important for immune responses against ingested substances (Figure 21.11). Peyer’s patches contain
904
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
specialized endothelial cells called M (or microfold) cells that sample material from the intestinal lumen and
transport it to nearby follicles so that adaptive immune responses to potential pathogens can be mounted. A similar
process occurs involving MALT in the mucosa and submucosa of the appendix. A blockage of the lumen triggers
these cells to elicit an inflammatory response that can lead to appendicitis.
FIGURE 21.11
Mucosa-associated Lymphoid Tissue (MALT) Nodule
LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University
of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) consists of lymphoid follicular structures with an overlying epithelial
layer found along the bifurcations of the bronchi, and between bronchi and arteries. They also have the typically
less-organized structure of other lymphoid nodules. These tissues, in addition to the tonsils, are effective against
inhaled pathogens.
21.2 Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the barrier defenses of the body
•
Show how the innate immune response is important and how it helps guide and prepare the body for adaptive
immune responses
•
Describe various soluble factors that are part of the innate immune response
•
Explain the steps of inflammation and how they lead to destruction of a pathogen
•
Discuss early induced immune responses and their level of effectiveness
The immune system can be divided into two overlapping mechanisms to destroy pathogens: the innate immune
response, which is relatively rapid but nonspecific and thus not always effective, and the adaptive immune
response, which is slower in its development during an initial infection with a pathogen, but is highly specific and
effective at attacking a wide variety of pathogens (Figure 21.12).
21.2 • Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
905
FIGURE 21.12
Cooperation between Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses
The innate immune system enhances adaptive
immune responses so they can be more effective.
Any discussion of the innate immune response usually begins with the physical barriers that prevent pathogens
from entering the body, destroy them after they enter, or flush them out before they can establish themselves in the
hospitable environment of the body’s soft tissues. Barrier defenses are part of the body’s most basic defense
mechanisms. The barrier defenses are not a response to infections, but they are continuously working to protect
against a broad range of pathogens.
The different modes of barrier defenses are associated with the external surfaces of the body, where pathogens may
try to enter (Table 21.2). The primary barrier to the entrance of microorganisms into the body is the skin. Not only is
the skin covered with a layer of dead, keratinized epithelium that is too dry for bacteria in which to grow, but as
these cells are continuously sloughed off from the skin, they carry bacteria and other pathogens with them.
Additionally, sweat and other skin secretions may lower pH, contain toxic lipids, and physically wash microbes away.
Barrier Defenses
Site
Specific defense
Protective aspect
Skin
Epidermal surface
Keratinized cells of surface, Langerhans cells
Skin (sweat/secretions)
Sweat glands, sebaceous
glands
Low pH, washing action
TABLE 21.2
906
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
Site
Specific defense
Protective aspect
Oral cavity
Salivary glands
Lysozyme
Stomach
Gastrointestinal tract
Low pH
Mucosal surfaces
Mucosal epithelium
Nonkeratinized epithelial cells
Normal flora (nonpathogenic
bacteria)
Mucosal tissues
Prevent pathogens from growing on mucosal
surfaces
TABLE 21.2
Another barrier is the saliva in the mouth, which is rich in lysozyme—an enzyme that destroys bacteria by digesting
their cell walls. The acidic environment of the stomach, which is fatal to many pathogens, is also a barrier.
Additionally, the mucus layer of the gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, reproductive tract, eyes, ears, and nose
traps both microbes and debris, and facilitates their removal. In the case of the upper respiratory tract, ciliated
epithelial cells move potentially contaminated mucus upwards to the mouth, where it is then swallowed into the
digestive tract, ending up in the harsh acidic environment of the stomach. Considering how often you breathe
compared to how often you eat or perform other activities that expose you to pathogens, it is not surprising that
multiple barrier mechanisms have evolved to work in concert to protect this vital area.
Cells of the Innate Immune Response
A phagocyte is a cell that is able to surround and engulf a particle or cell, a process called phagocytosis. The
phagocytes of the immune system engulf other particles or cells, either to clean an area of debris, old cells, or to kill
pathogenic organisms such as bacteria. The phagocytes are the body’s fast acting, first line of immunological
defense against organisms that have breached barrier defenses and have entered the vulnerable tissues of the body.
Phagocytes: Macrophages and Neutrophils
Many of the cells of the immune system have a phagocytic ability, at least at some point during their life cycles.
Phagocytosis is an important and effective mechanism of destroying pathogens during innate immune responses.
The phagocyte takes the organism inside itself as a phagosome, which subsequently fuses with a lysosome and its
digestive enzymes, effectively killing many pathogens. On the other hand, some bacteria including Mycobacteria
tuberculosis, the cause of tuberculosis, may be resistant to these enzymes and are therefore much more difficult to
clear from the body. Macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells are the major phagocytes of the immune system.
A macrophage is an irregularly shaped phagocyte that is amoeboid in nature and is the most versatile of the
phagocytes in the body. Macrophages move through tissues and squeeze through capillary walls using pseudopodia.
They not only participate in innate immune responses but have also evolved to cooperate with lymphocytes as part
of the adaptive immune response. Macrophages exist in many tissues of the body, either freely roaming through
connective tissues or fixed to reticular fibers within specific tissues such as lymph nodes. When pathogens breach
the body’s barrier defenses, macrophages are the first line of defense (Table 21.3). They are called different names,
depending on the tissue: Kupffer cells in the liver, histiocytes in connective tissue, and alveolar macrophages in the
lungs.
A neutrophil is a phagocytic cell that is attracted via chemotaxis from the bloodstream to infected tissues. These
spherical cells are granulocytes. A granulocyte contains cytoplasmic granules, which in turn contain a variety of
vasoactive mediators such as histamine. In contrast, macrophages are agranulocytes. An agranulocyte has few or no
cytoplasmic granules. Whereas macrophages act like sentries, always on guard against infection, neutrophils can be
thought of as military reinforcements that are called into a battle to hasten the destruction of the enemy. Although,
usually thought of as the primary pathogen-killing cell of the inflammatory process of the innate immune response,
new research has suggested that neutrophils play a role in the adaptive immune response as well, just as
macrophages do.
A monocyte is a circulating precursor cell that differentiates into either a macrophage or dendritic cell, which can be
21.2 • Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
907
rapidly attracted to areas of infection by signal molecules of inflammation.
Phagocytic Cells of the Innate Immune System
Cell
Cell type
Primary location
Function in the innate immune response
Macrophage
Agranulocyte
Body cavities/organs
Phagocytosis
Neutrophil
Granulocyte
Blood
Phagocytosis
Monocyte
Agranulocyte
Blood
Precursor of macrophage/dendritic cell
TABLE 21.3
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells are a type of lymphocyte that have the ability to induce apoptosis, that is, programmed cell death, in cells
infected with intracellular pathogens such as obligate intracellular bacteria and viruses. NK cells recognize these
cells by mechanisms that are still not well understood, but that presumably involve their surface receptors. NK cells
can induce apoptosis, in which a cascade of events inside the cell causes its own death by either of two
mechanisms:
1) NK cells are able to respond to chemical signals and express the fas ligand. The fas ligand is a surface molecule
that binds to the fas molecule on the surface of the infected cell, sending it apoptotic signals, thus killing the cell
and the pathogen within it; or
2) The granules of the NK cells release perforins and granzymes. A perforin is a protein that forms pores in the
membranes of infected cells. A granzyme is a protein-digesting enzyme that enters the cell via the perforin pores
and triggers apoptosis intracellularly.
Both mechanisms are especially effective against virally infected cells. If apoptosis is induced before the virus has
the ability to synthesize and assemble all its components, no infectious virus will be released from the cell, thus
preventing further infection.
Recognition of Pathogens
Cells of the innate immune response, the phagocytic cells, and the cytotoxic NK cells recognize patterns of
pathogen-specific molecules, such as bacterial cell wall components or bacterial flagellar proteins, using pattern
recognition receptors. A pattern recognition receptor (PRR) is a membrane-bound receptor that recognizes
characteristic features of a pathogen and molecules released by stressed or damaged cells.
These receptors, which are thought to have evolved prior to the adaptive immune response, are present on the cell
surface whether they are needed or not. Their variety, however, is limited by two factors. First, the fact that each
receptor type must be encoded by a specific gene requires the cell to allocate most or all of its DNA to make
receptors able to recognize all pathogens. Secondly, the variety of receptors is limited by the finite surface area of
the cell membrane. Thus, the innate immune system must “get by” using only a limited number of receptors that are
active against as wide a variety of pathogens as possible. This strategy is in stark contrast to the approach used by
the adaptive immune system, which uses large numbers of different receptors, each highly specific to a particular
pathogen.
Should the cells of the innate immune system come into contact with a species of pathogen they recognize, the cell
will bind to the pathogen and initiate phagocytosis (or cellular apoptosis in the case of an intracellular pathogen) in
an effort to destroy the offending microbe. Receptors vary somewhat according to cell type, but they usually include
receptors for bacterial components and for complement, discussed below.
Soluble Mediators of the Innate Immune Response
The previous discussions have alluded to chemical signals that can induce cells to change various physiological
characteristics, such as the expression of a particular receptor. These soluble factors are secreted during innate or
908
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
early induced responses, and later during adaptive immune responses.
Cytokines and Chemokines
A cytokine is signaling molecule that allows cells to communicate with each other over short distances. Cytokines
are secreted into the intercellular space, and the action of the cytokine induces the receiving cell to change its
physiology. A chemokine is a soluble chemical mediator similar to cytokines except that its function is to attract
cells (chemotaxis) from longer distances.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/chemotaxis) to learn about phagocyte chemotaxis. Phagocyte chemotaxis is
the movement of phagocytes according to the secretion of chemical messengers in the form of interleukins and
other chemokines. By what means does a phagocyte destroy a bacterium that it has ingested?
Early induced Proteins
Early induced proteins are those that are not constitutively present in the body, but are made as they are needed
early during the innate immune response. Interferons are an example of early induced proteins. Cells infected with
viruses secrete interferons that travel to adjacent cells and induce them to make antiviral proteins. Thus, even
though the initial cell is sacrificed, the surrounding cells are protected. Other early induced proteins specific for
bacterial cell wall components are mannose-binding protein and C-reactive protein, made in the liver, which bind
specifically to polysaccharide components of the bacterial cell wall. Phagocytes such as macrophages have
receptors for these proteins, and they are thus able to recognize them as they are bound to the bacteria. This brings
the phagocyte and bacterium into close proximity and enhances the phagocytosis of the bacterium by the process
known as opsonization. Opsonization is the tagging of a pathogen for phagocytosis by the binding of an antibody or
an antimicrobial protein.
Complement System
The complement system is a series of proteins constitutively found in the blood plasma. As such, these proteins are
not considered part of the early induced immune response, even though they share features with some of the
antibacterial proteins of this class. Made in the liver, they have a variety of functions in the innate immune response,
using what is known as the “alternate pathway” of complement activation. Additionally, complement functions in
the adaptive immune response as well, in what is called the classical pathway. The complement system consists of
several proteins that enzymatically alter and fragment later proteins in a series, which is why it is termed cascade.
Once activated, the series of reactions is irreversible, and releases fragments that have the following actions:
•
Bind to the cell membrane of the pathogen that activates it, labeling it for phagocytosis (opsonization)
•
Diffuse away from the pathogen and act as chemotactic agents to attract phagocytic cells to the site of
inflammation
•
Form damaging pores in the plasma membrane of the pathogen
Figure 21.13 shows the classical pathway, which requires antibodies of the adaptive immune response. The
alternate pathway does not require an antibody to become activated.
21.2 • Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
909
FIGURE 21.13
Complement Cascade and Function
The classical pathway, used during adaptive immune responses, occurs when C1
reacts with antibodies that have bound an antigen.
The splitting of the C3 protein is the common step to both pathways. In the alternate pathway, C3 is activated
spontaneously and, after reacting with the molecules factor P, factor B, and factor D, splits apart. The larger
fragment, C3b, binds to the surface of the pathogen and C3a, the smaller fragment, diffuses outward from the site of
activation and attracts phagocytes to the site of infection. Surface-bound C3b then activates the rest of the cascade,
with the last five proteins, C5–C9, forming the membrane-attack complex (MAC). The MAC can kill certain
pathogens by disrupting their osmotic balance. The MAC is especially effective against a broad range of bacteria.
The classical pathway is similar, except the early stages of activation require the presence of antibody bound to
antigen, and thus is dependent on the adaptive immune response. The earlier fragments of the cascade also have
important functions. Phagocytic cells such as macrophages and neutrophils are attracted to an infection site by
chemotactic attraction to smaller complement fragments. Additionally, once they arrive, their receptors for surface-
bound C3b opsonize the pathogen for phagocytosis and destruction.
Inflammatory Response
The hallmark of the innate immune response is inflammation. Inflammation is something everyone has
experienced. Stub a toe, cut a finger, or do any activity that causes tissue damage and inflammation will result, with
its four characteristics: heat, redness, pain, and swelling (“loss of function” is sometimes mentioned as a fifth
characteristic). It is important to note that inflammation does not have to be initiated by an infection, but can also be
caused by tissue injuries. The release of damaged cellular contents into the site of injury is enough to stimulate the
response, even in the absence of breaks in physical barriers that would allow pathogens to enter (by hitting your
thumb with a hammer, for example). The inflammatory reaction brings in phagocytic cells to the damaged area to
910
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
clear cellular debris and to set the stage for wound repair (Figure 21.14).
FIGURE 21.14
This reaction also brings in the cells of the innate immune system, allowing them to get rid of the sources of a
possible infection. Inflammation is part of a very basic form of immune response. The process not only brings fluid
and cells into the site to destroy the pathogen and remove it and debris from the site, but also helps to isolate the
site, limiting the spread of the pathogen. Acute inflammation is a short-term inflammatory response to an insult to
the body. If the cause of the inflammation is not resolved, however, it can lead to chronic inflammation, which is
associated with major tissue destruction and fibrosis. Chronic inflammation is ongoing inflammation. It can be
caused by foreign bodies, persistent pathogens, and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
There are four important parts to the inflammatory response:
•
Tissue Injury. The released contents of injured cells stimulate the release of mast cell granules and their potent
inflammatory mediators such as histamine, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins. Histamine increases the
diameter of local blood vessels (vasodilation), causing an increase in blood flow. Histamine also increases the
permeability of local capillaries, causing plasma to leak out and form interstitial fluid. This causes the swelling
associated with inflammation.
Additionally, injured cells, phagocytes, and basophils are sources of inflammatory mediators, including
prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Leukotrienes attract neutrophils from the blood by chemotaxis and increase
vascular permeability. Prostaglandins cause vasodilation by relaxing vascular smooth muscle and are a major
cause of the pain associated with inflammation. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin and
ibuprofen relieve pain by inhibiting prostaglandin production.
•
Vasodilation. Many inflammatory mediators such as histamine are vasodilators that increase the diameters of
local capillaries. This causes increased blood flow and is responsible for the heat and redness of inflamed
tissue. It allows greater access of the blood to the site of inflammation.
•
Increased Vascular Permeability. At the same time, inflammatory mediators increase the permeability of the
local vasculature, causing leakage of fluid into the interstitial space, resulting in the swelling, or edema,
associated with inflammation.
•
Recruitment of Phagocytes. Leukotrienes are particularly good at attracting neutrophils from the blood to the
site of infection by chemotaxis. Following an early neutrophil infiltrate stimulated by macrophage cytokines,
21.2 • Barrier Defenses and the Innate Immune Response
911
more macrophages are recruited to clean up the debris left over at the site. When local infections are severe,
neutrophils are attracted to the sites of infections in large numbers, and as they phagocytose the pathogens and
subsequently die, their accumulated cellular remains are visible as pus at the infection site.
Overall, inflammation is valuable for many reasons. Not only are the pathogens killed and debris removed, but the
increase in vascular permeability encourages the entry of clotting factors, the first step towards wound repair.
Inflammation also facilitates the transport of antigen to lymph nodes by dendritic cells for the development of the
adaptive immune response.
21.3 The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional
Types
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the advantages of the adaptive immune response over the innate immune response
•
List the various characteristics of an antigen
•
Describe the types of T cell antigen receptors
•
Outline the steps of T cell development
•
Describe the major T cell types and their functions
Innate immune responses (and early induced responses) are in many cases ineffective at completely controlling
pathogen growth. However, they slow pathogen growth and allow time for the adaptive immune response to
strengthen and either control or eliminate the pathogen. The innate immune system also sends signals to the cells
of the adaptive immune system, guiding them in how to attack the pathogen. Thus, these are the two important
arms of the immune response.
The Benefits of the Adaptive Immune Response
The specificity of the adaptive immune response—its ability to specifically recognize and make a response against a
wide variety of pathogens—is its great strength. Antigens, the small chemical groups often associated with
pathogens, are recognized by receptors on the surface of B and T lymphocytes. The adaptive immune response to
these antigens is so versatile that it can respond to nearly any pathogen. This increase in specificity comes because
the adaptive immune response has a unique way to develop as many as 1011, or 100 trillion, different receptors to
recognize nearly every conceivable pathogen. How could so many different types of antibodies be encoded? And
what about the many specificities of T cells? There is not nearly enough DNA in a cell to have a separate gene for
each specificity. The mechanism was finally worked out in the 1970s and 1980s using the new tools of molecular
genetics.
Primary Disease and Immunological Memory
The immune system’s first exposure to a pathogen is called a primary adaptive response. Symptoms of a first
infection, called primary disease, are always relatively severe because it takes time for an initial adaptive immune
response to a pathogen to become effective.
Upon re-exposure to the same pathogen, a secondary adaptive immune response is generated, which is stronger
and faster than the primary response. The secondary adaptive response often eliminates a pathogen before it can
cause significant tissue damage or any symptoms. Without symptoms, there is no disease, and the individual is not
even aware of the infection. This secondary response is the basis of immunological memory, which protects us
from getting diseases repeatedly from the same pathogen. By this mechanism, an individual’s exposure to
pathogens early in life spares the person from these diseases later in life.
Self Recognition
A third important feature of the adaptive immune response is its ability to distinguish between self-antigens, those
that are normally present in the body, and foreign antigens, those that might be on a potential pathogen. As T and B
cells mature, there are mechanisms in place that prevent them from recognizing self-antigen, preventing a
damaging immune response against the body. These mechanisms are not 100 percent effective, however, and their
breakdown leads to autoimmune diseases, which will be discussed later in this chapter.
912
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
T Cell-Mediated Immune Responses
The primary cells that control the adaptive immune response are the lymphocytes, the T and B cells. T cells are
particularly important, as they not only control a multitude of immune responses directly, but also control B cell
immune responses in many cases as well. Thus, many of the decisions about how to attack a pathogen are made at
the T cell level, and knowledge of their functional types is crucial to understanding the functioning and regulation of
adaptive immune responses as a whole.
T lymphocytes recognize antigens based on a two-chain protein receptor. The most common and important of these
are the alpha-beta T cell receptors (Figure 21.15).
FIGURE 21.15
Alpha-beta T Cell Receptor
Notice the constant and variable regions of each chain, anchored by the transmembrane
region.
There are two chains in the T cell receptor, and each chain consists of two domains. The variable region domain is
furthest away from the T cell membrane and is so named because its amino acid sequence varies between
receptors. In contrast, the constant region domain has less variation. The differences in the amino acid sequences
of the variable domains are the molecular basis of the diversity of antigens the receptor can recognize. Thus, the
antigen-binding site of the receptor consists of the terminal ends of both receptor chains, and the amino acid
sequences of those two areas combine to determine its antigenic specificity. Each T cell produces only one type of
receptor and thus is specific for a single particular antigen.
Antigens
Antigens on pathogens are usually large and complex, and consist of many antigenic determinants. An antigenic
determinant (epitope) is one of the small regions within an antigen to which a receptor can bind, and antigenic
determinants are limited by the size of the receptor itself. They usually consist of six or fewer amino acid residues in
a protein, or one or two sugar moieties in a carbohydrate antigen. Antigenic determinants on a carbohydrate antigen
are usually less diverse than on a protein antigen. Carbohydrate antigens are found on bacterial cell walls and on red
blood cells (the ABO blood group antigens). Protein antigens are complex because of the variety of three-
dimensional shapes that proteins can assume, and are especially important for the immune responses to viruses
and worm parasites. It is the interaction of the shape of the antigen and the complementary shape of the amino
acids of the antigen-binding site that accounts for the chemical basis of specificity (Figure 21.16).
21.3 • The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
913
FIGURE 21.16
Antigenic Determinants
A typical protein antigen has multiple antigenic determinants, shown by the ability of T cells
with three different specificities to bind to different parts of the same antigen.
Antigen Processing and Presentation
Although Figure 21.16 shows T cell receptors interacting with antigenic determinants directly, the mechanism that T
cells use to recognize antigens is, in reality, much more complex. T cells do not recognize free-floating or cell-bound
antigens as they appear on the surface of the pathogen. They only recognize antigen on the surface of specialized
cells called antigen-presenting cells. Antigens are internalized by these cells. Antigen processing is a mechanism
that enzymatically cleaves the antigen into smaller pieces. The antigen fragments are then brought to the cell’s
surface and associated with a specialized type of antigen-presenting protein known as a major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecule. The MHC is the cluster of genes that encode these antigen-presenting molecules. The
association of the antigen fragments with an MHC molecule on the surface of a cell is known as antigen
presentation and results in the recognition of antigen by a T cell. This association of antigen and MHC occurs inside
the cell, and it is the complex of the two that is brought to the surface. The peptide-binding cleft is a small
indentation at the end of the MHC molecule that is furthest away from the cell membrane; it is here that the
processed fragment of antigen sits. MHC molecules are capable of presenting a variety of antigens, depending on
the amino acid sequence, in their peptide-binding clefts. It is the combination of the MHC molecule and the
fragment of the original peptide or carbohydrate that is actually physically recognized by the T cell receptor (Figure
21.17).
914
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.17
Antigen Processing and Presentation
Two distinct types of MHC molecules, MHC class I and MHC class II, play roles in antigen presentation. Although
produced from different genes, they both have similar functions. They bring processed antigen to the surface of the
cell via a transport vesicle and present the antigen to the T cell and its receptor. Antigens from different classes of
pathogens, however, use different MHC classes and take different routes through the cell to get to the surface for
presentation. The basic mechanism, though, is the same. Antigens are processed by digestion, are brought into the
endomembrane system of the cell, and then are expressed on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell for antigen
recognition by a T cell. Intracellular antigens are typical of viruses, which replicate inside the cell, and certain other
intracellular parasites and bacteria. These antigens are processed in the cytosol by an enzyme complex known as
the proteasome and are then brought into the endoplasmic reticulum by the transporter associated with antigen
processing (TAP) system, where they interact with class I MHC molecules and are eventually transported to the cell
surface by a transport vesicle.
Extracellular antigens, characteristic of many bacteria, parasites, and fungi that do not replicate inside the cell’s
cytoplasm, are brought into the endomembrane system of the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis. The resulting
vesicle fuses with vesicles from the Golgi complex, which contain pre-formed MHC class II molecules. After fusion
of these two vesicles and the association of antigen and MHC, the new vesicle makes its way to the cell surface.
Professional Antigen-presenting Cells
Many cell types express class I molecules for the presentation of intracellular antigens. These MHC molecules may
then stimulate a cytotoxic T cell immune response, eventually destroying the cell and the pathogen within. This is
especially important when it comes to the most common class of intracellular pathogens, the virus. Viruses infect
nearly every tissue of the body, so all these tissues must necessarily be able to express class I MHC or no T cell
response can be made.
On the other hand, class II MHC molecules are expressed only on the cells of the immune system, specifically cells
that affect other arms of the immune response. Thus, these cells are called “professional” antigen-presenting cells
to distinguish them from those that bear class I MHC. The three types of professional antigen presenters are
21.3 • The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
915
macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells (Table 21.4).
Macrophages stimulate T cells to release cytokines that enhance phagocytosis. Dendritic cells also kill pathogens by
phagocytosis (see Figure 21.17), but their major function is to bring antigens to regional draining lymph nodes. The
lymph nodes are the locations in which most T cell responses against pathogens of the interstitial tissues are
mounted. Macrophages are found in the skin and in the lining of mucosal surfaces, such as the nasopharynx,
stomach, lungs, and intestines. B cells may also present antigens to T cells, which are necessary for certain types of
antibody responses, to be covered later in this chapter.
Classes of Antigen-presenting Cells
MHC
Cell type
Phagocytic?
Function
Class
I
Many
No
Stimulates cytotoxic T cell immune response
Class
II
Macrophage
Yes
Stimulates phagocytosis and presentation at primary
infection site
Class
II
Dendritic
Yes, in tissues
Brings antigens to regional lymph nodes
Class
II
B cell
Yes, internalizes surface Ig and
antigen
Stimulates antibody secretion by B cells
TABLE 21.4
T Cell Development and Differentiation
The process of eliminating T cells that might attack the cells of one’s own body is referred to as T cell tolerance.
While thymocytes are in the cortex of the thymus, they are referred to as “double negatives,” meaning that they do
not bear the CD4 or CD8 molecules that you can use to follow their pathways of differentiation (Figure 21.18). In the
cortex of the thymus, they are exposed to cortical epithelial cells. In a process known as positive selection, double-
negative thymocytes bind to the MHC molecules they observe on the thymic epithelia, and the MHC molecules of
“self” are selected. This mechanism kills many thymocytes during T cell differentiation. In fact, only two percent of
the thymocytes that enter the thymus leave it as mature, functional T cells.
916
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.18
Differentiation of T Cells within the Thymus
Immature T-cells, called thymocytes, enter the thymus and go through a
series of developmental stages that ensures both function and tolerance before they leave and become functional components of the
adaptive immune response.
Later, the cells become double positives that express both CD4 and CD8 markers and move from the cortex to the
junction between the cortex and medulla. It is here that negative selection takes place. In negative selection, self-
antigens are brought into the thymus from other parts of the body by professional antigen-presenting cells. The T
cells that bind to these self-antigens are selected for negatively and are killed by apoptosis. In summary, the only T
cells left are those that can bind to MHC molecules of the body with foreign antigens presented on their binding
clefts, preventing an attack on one’s own body tissues, at least under normal circumstances. Tolerance can be
broken, however, by the development of an autoimmune response, to be discussed later in this chapter.
The cells that leave the thymus become single positives, expressing either CD4 or CD8, but not both (see Figure
21.18). The CD4+ T cells will bind to class II MHC and the CD8+ cells will bind to class I MHC. The discussion that
follows explains the functions of these molecules and how they can be used to differentiate between the different T
cell functional types.
21.3 • The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
917
Mechanisms of T Cell-mediated Immune Responses
Mature T cells become activated by recognizing processed foreign antigen in association with a self-MHC molecule
and begin dividing rapidly by mitosis. This proliferation of T cells is called clonal expansion and is necessary to
make the immune response strong enough to effectively control a pathogen. How does the body select only those T
cells that are needed against a specific pathogen? Again, the specificity of a T cell is based on the amino acid
sequence and the three-dimensional shape of the antigen-binding site formed by the variable regions of the two
chains of the T cell receptor (Figure 21.19). Clonal selection is the process of antigen binding only to those T cells
that have receptors specific to that antigen. Each T cell that is activated has a specific receptor “hard-wired” into its
DNA, and all of its progeny will have identical DNA and T cell receptors, forming clones of the original T cell.
FIGURE 21.19
Clonal Selection and Expansion of T Lymphocytes
Stem cells differentiate into T cells with specific receptors, called
clones. The clones with receptors specific for antigens on the pathogen are selected for and expanded.
Clonal Selection and Expansion
The clonal selection theory was proposed by Frank Burnet in the 1950s. However, the term clonal selection is not a
complete description of the theory, as clonal expansion goes hand in glove with the selection process. The main
tenet of the theory is that a typical individual has a multitude (1011) of different types of T cell clones based on their
receptors. In this use, a clone is a group of lymphocytes that share the same antigen receptor. Each clone is
necessarily present in the body in low numbers. Otherwise, the body would not have room for lymphocytes with so
many specificities.
Only those clones of lymphocytes whose receptors are activated by the antigen are stimulated to proliferate. Keep in
mind that most antigens have multiple antigenic determinants, so a T cell response to a typical antigen involves a
polyclonal response. A polyclonal response is the stimulation of multiple T cell clones. Once activated, the selected
clones increase in number and make many copies of each cell type, each clone with its unique receptor. By the time
this process is complete, the body will have large numbers of specific lymphocytes available to fight the infection
(see Figure 21.19).
918
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
The Cellular Basis of Immunological Memory
As already discussed, one of the major features of an adaptive immune response is the development of
immunological memory.
During a primary adaptive immune response, both memory T cells and effector T cells are generated. Memory T
cells are long-lived and can even persist for a lifetime. Memory cells are primed to act rapidly. Thus, any subsequent
exposure to the pathogen will elicit a very rapid T cell response. This rapid, secondary adaptive response generates
large numbers of effector T cells so fast that the pathogen is often overwhelmed before it can cause any symptoms
of disease. This is what is meant by immunity to a disease. The same pattern of primary and secondary immune
responses occurs in B cells and the antibody response, as will be discussed later in the chapter.
T Cell Types and their Functions
In the discussion of T cell development, you saw that mature T cells express either the CD4 marker or the CD8
marker, but not both. These markers are cell adhesion molecules that keep the T cell in close contact with the
antigen-presenting cell by directly binding to the MHC molecule (to a different part of the molecule than does the
antigen). Thus, T cells and antigen-presenting cells are held together in two ways: by CD4 or CD8 attaching to MHC
and by the T cell receptor binding to antigen (Figure 21.20).
FIGURE 21.20
Pathogen Presentation
(a) CD4 is associated with helper and regulatory T cells. An extracellular pathogen is processed
and presented in the binding cleft of a class II MHC molecule, and this interaction is strengthened by the CD4 molecule. (b) CD8 is
associated with cytotoxic T cells. An intracellular pathogen is presented by a class I MHC molecule, and CD8 interacts with it.
Although the correlation is not 100 percent, CD4-bearing T cells are associated with helper functions and
CD8-bearing T cells are associated with cytotoxicity. These functional distinctions based on CD4 and CD8 markers
are useful in defining the function of each type.
Helper T Cells and their Cytokines
Helper T cells (Th), bearing the CD4 molecule, function by secreting cytokines that act to enhance other immune
responses. There are two classes of Th cells, and they act on different components of the immune response. These
cells are not distinguished by their surface molecules but by the characteristic set of cytokines they secrete (Table
21.5).
21.3 • The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
919
Th1 cells are a type of helper T cell that secretes cytokines that regulate the immunological activity and
development of a variety of cells, including macrophages and other types of T cells.
Th2 cells, on the other hand, are cytokine-secreting cells that act on B cells to drive their differentiation into plasma
cells that make antibody. In fact, T cell help is required for antibody responses to most protein antigens, and these
are called T cell-dependent antigens.
Cytotoxic T cells
Cytotoxic T cells (Tc) are T cells that kill target cells by inducing apoptosis using the same mechanism as NK cells.
They either express Fas ligand, which binds to the fas molecule on the target cell, or act by using perforins and
granzymes contained in their cytoplasmic granules. As was discussed earlier with NK cells, killing a virally infected
cell before the virus can complete its replication cycle results in the production of no infectious particles. As more Tc
cells are developed during an immune response, they overwhelm the ability of the virus to cause disease. In
addition, each Tc cell can kill more than one target cell, making them especially effective. Tc cells are so important in
the antiviral immune response that some speculate that this was the main reason the adaptive immune response
evolved in the first place.
Regulatory T Cells
Regulatory T cells (Treg), or suppressor T cells, are the most recently discovered of the types listed here, so less is
understood about them. In addition to CD4, they bear the molecules CD25 and FOXP3. Exactly how they function is
still under investigation, but it is known that they suppress other T cell immune responses. This is an important
feature of the immune response, because if clonal expansion during immune responses were allowed to continue
uncontrolled, these responses could lead to autoimmune diseases and other medical issues.
Not only do T cells directly destroy pathogens, but they regulate nearly all other types of the adaptive immune
response as well, as evidenced by the functions of the T cell types, their surface markers, the cells they work on,
and the types of pathogens they work against (see Table 21.5).
Functions of T Cell Types and Their Cytokines
T
cell
Main
target
Function
Pathogen
Surface
marker
MHC
Cytokines or mediators
Tc
Infected
cells
Cytotoxicity
Intracellular
CD8
Class
I
Perforins, granzymes, and fas
ligand
Th1
Macrophage
Helper
inducer
Extracellular
CD4
Class
II
Interferon-γ and TGF-β
Th2
B cell
Helper
inducer
Extracellular
CD4
Class
II
IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, and others
Treg
Th cell
Suppressor
None
CD4, CD25
?
TGF-β and IL-10
TABLE 21.5
21.4 The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how B cells mature and how B cell tolerance develops
•
Discuss how B cells are activated and differentiate into plasma cells
•
Describe the structure of the antibody classes and their functions
Antibodies were the first component of the adaptive immune response to be characterized by scientists working on
the immune system. It was already known that individuals who survived a bacterial infection were immune to re-
920
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
infection with the same pathogen. Early microbiologists took serum from an immune patient and mixed it with a
fresh culture of the same type of bacteria, then observed the bacteria under a microscope. The bacteria became
clumped in a process called agglutination. When a different bacterial species was used, the agglutination did not
happen. Thus, there was something in the serum of immune individuals that could specifically bind to and
agglutinate bacteria.
Scientists now know the cause of the agglutination is an antibody molecule, also called an immunoglobulin. What is
an antibody? An antibody protein is essentially a secreted form of a B cell receptor. (In fact, surface immunoglobulin
is another name for the B cell receptor.) Not surprisingly, the same genes encode both the secreted antibodies and
the surface immunoglobulins. One minor difference in the way these proteins are synthesized distinguishes a naïve
B cell with antibody on its surface from an antibody-secreting plasma cell with no antibodies on its surface. The
antibodies of the plasma cell have the exact same antigen-binding site and specificity as their B cell precursors.
There are five different classes of antibody found in humans: IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA, and IgE. Each of these has specific
functions in the immune response, so by learning about them, researchers can learn about the great variety of
antibody functions critical to many adaptive immune responses.
B cells do not recognize antigen in the complex fashion of T cells. B cells can recognize native, unprocessed antigen
and do not require the participation of MHC molecules and antigen-presenting cells.
B Cell Differentiation and Activation
B cells differentiate in the bone marrow. During the process of maturation, up to 100 trillion different clones of B
cells are generated, which is similar to the diversity of antigen receptors seen in T cells.
B cell differentiation and the development of tolerance are not quite as well understood as it is in T cells. Central
tolerance is the destruction or inactivation of B cells that recognize self-antigens in the bone marrow, and its role is
critical and well established. In the process of clonal deletion, immature B cells that bind strongly to self-antigens
expressed on tissues are signaled to induce their own destruction by apoptosis, removing them from the population.
In the process of clonal anergy, however, B cells exposed to soluble antigen in the bone marrow are not physically
deleted, but become unable to function.
Another mechanism called peripheral tolerance is a direct result of T cell tolerance. In peripheral tolerance,
functional, mature B cells leave the bone marrow but have yet to be exposed to self-antigen. Most protein antigens
require signals from helper T cells (Th2) to proceed to make antibody. When a B cell binds to a self-antigen but
receives no signals from a nearby Th2 cell to produce antibody, the cell is signaled to undergo apoptosis and is
destroyed. This is yet another example of the control that T cells have over the adaptive immune response.
After B cells are activated by their binding to antigen, they differentiate into plasma cells. Plasma cells often leave
the secondary lymphoid organs, where the response is generated, and migrate back to the bone marrow, where the
whole differentiation process started. After secreting antibodies for a specific period, they die, as most of their
energy is devoted to making antibodies and not to maintaining themselves. Thus, plasma cells are said to be
terminally differentiated.
The final B cell of interest is the memory B cell, which results from the clonal expansion of an activated B cell.
Memory B cells function in a way similar to memory T cells. They lead to a stronger and faster secondary response
when compared to the primary response, as illustrated below.
Antibody Structure
Antibodies are glycoproteins consisting of two types of polypeptide chains with attached carbohydrates. The heavy
chain and the light chain are the two polypeptides that form the antibody. The main differences between the
classes of antibodies are in the differences between their heavy chains, but as you shall see, the light chains have an
important role, forming part of the antigen-binding site on the antibody molecules.
Four-chain Models of Antibody Structures
All antibody molecules have two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains. (Some antibodies contain
multiple units of this four-chain structure.) The Fc region of the antibody is formed by the two heavy chains coming
together, usually linked by disulfide bonds (Figure 21.21). The Fc portion of the antibody is important in that many
21.4 • The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
921
effector cells of the immune system have Fc receptors. Cells having these receptors can then bind to antibody-
coated pathogens, greatly increasing the specificity of the effector cells. At the other end of the molecule are two
identical antigen-binding sites.
FIGURE 21.21
Antibody and IgG2 Structures
The typical four chain structure of a generic antibody (a) and the corresponding three-
dimensional structure of the antibody IgG2 (b). (credit b: modification of work by Tim Vickers)
Five Classes of Antibodies and their Functions
In general, antibodies have two basic functions. They can act as the B cell antigen receptor or they can be secreted,
circulate, and bind to a pathogen, often labeling it for identification by other forms of the immune response. Of the
five antibody classes, notice that only two can function as the antigen receptor for naïve B cells: IgM and IgD (Figure
21.22). Mature B cells that leave the bone marrow express both IgM and IgD, but both antibodies have the same
antigen specificity. Only IgM is secreted, however, and no other nonreceptor function for IgD has been discovered.
FIGURE 21.22
Five Classes of Antibodies
IgM consists of five four-chain structures (20 total chains with 10 identical antigen-binding sites) and is thus the
largest of the antibody molecules. IgM is usually the first antibody made during a primary response. Its 10 antigen-
922
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
binding sites and large shape allow it to bind well to many bacterial surfaces. It is excellent at binding complement
proteins and activating the complement cascade, consistent with its role in promoting chemotaxis, opsonization,
and cell lysis. Thus, it is a very effective antibody against bacteria at early stages of a primary antibody response. As
the primary response proceeds, the antibody produced in a B cell can change to IgG, IgA, or IgE by the process
known as class switching. Class switching is the change of one antibody class to another. While the class of
antibody changes, the specificity and the antigen-binding sites do not. Thus, the antibodies made are still specific to
the pathogen that stimulated the initial IgM response.
IgG is a major antibody of late primary responses and the main antibody of secondary responses in the blood. This
is because class switching occurs during primary responses. IgG is a monomeric antibody that clears pathogens
from the blood and can activate complement proteins (although not as well as IgM), taking advantage of its
antibacterial activities. Furthermore, this class of antibody is the one that crosses the placenta to protect the
developing fetus from disease exits the blood to the interstitial fluid to fight extracellular pathogens.
IgA exists in two forms, a four-chain monomer in the blood and an eight-chain structure, or dimer, in exocrine gland
secretions of the mucous membranes, including mucus, saliva, and tears. Thus, dimeric IgA is the only antibody to
leave the interior of the body to protect body surfaces. IgA is also of importance to newborns, because this antibody
is present in mother’s breast milk (colostrum), which serves to protect the infant from disease.
IgE is usually associated with allergies and anaphylaxis. It is present in the lowest concentration in the blood,
because its Fc region binds strongly to an IgE-specific Fc receptor on the surfaces of mast cells. IgE makes mast cell
degranulation very specific, such that if a person is allergic to peanuts, there will be peanut-specific IgE bound to
their mast cells. In this person, eating peanuts will cause the mast cells to degranulate, sometimes causing severe
allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, a severe, systemic allergic response that can cause death.
Clonal Selection of B Cells
Clonal selection and expansion work much the same way in B cells as in T cells. Only B cells with appropriate
antigen specificity are selected for and expanded (Figure 21.23). Eventually, the plasma cells secrete antibodies
with antigenic specificity identical to those that were on the surfaces of the selected B cells. Notice in the figure that
both plasma cells and memory B cells are generated simultaneously.
21.4 • The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
923
FIGURE 21.23
Clonal Selection of B Cells
During a primary B cell immune response, both antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory
B cells are produced. These memory cells lead to the differentiation of more plasma cells and memory B cells during secondary responses.
Primary versus Secondary B Cell Responses
Primary and secondary responses as they relate to T cells were discussed earlier. This section will look at these
responses with B cells and antibody production. Because antibodies are easily obtained from blood samples, they
are easy to follow and graph (Figure 21.24). As you will see from the figure, the primary response to an antigen
(representing a pathogen) is delayed by several days. This is the time it takes for the B cell clones to expand and
differentiate into plasma cells. The level of antibody produced is low, but it is sufficient for immune protection. The
second time a person encounters the same antigen, there is no time delay, and the amount of antibody made is
much higher. Thus, the secondary antibody response overwhelms the pathogens quickly and, in most situations, no
symptoms are felt. When a different antigen is used, another primary response is made with its low antibody levels
and time delay.
924
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.24
Primary and Secondary Antibody Responses
Antigen A is given once to generate a primary response and later to
generate a secondary response. When a different antigen is given for the first time, a new primary response is made.
Active versus Passive Immunity
Immunity to pathogens, and the ability to control pathogen growth so that damage to the tissues of the body is
limited, can be acquired by (1) the active development of an immune response in the infected individual or (2) the
passive transfer of immune components from an immune individual to a nonimmune one. Both active and passive
immunity have examples in the natural world and as part of medicine.
Active immunity is the resistance to pathogens acquired during an adaptive immune response within an individual
(Table 21.6). Naturally acquired active immunity, the response to a pathogen, is the focus of this chapter. Artificially
acquired active immunity involves the use of vaccines. A vaccine is a killed or weakened pathogen or its components
that, when administered to a healthy individual, leads to the development of immunological memory (a weakened
primary immune response) without causing much in the way of symptoms. Thus, with the use of vaccines, one can
avoid the damage from disease that results from the first exposure to the pathogen, yet reap the benefits of
protection from immunological memory. The advent of vaccines was one of the major medical advances of the
twentieth century and led to the eradication of smallpox and the control of many infectious diseases, including polio,
measles, and whooping cough.
Active versus Passive Immunity
Natural
Artificial
Active
Adaptive immune response
Vaccine response
Passive
Trans-placental antibodies/breastfeeding
Immune globulin injections
TABLE 21.6
Passive immunity arises from the transfer of antibodies to an individual without requiring them to mount their own
active immune response. Naturally acquired passive immunity is seen during fetal development. IgG is transferred
from the maternal circulation to the fetus via the placenta, protecting the fetus from infection and protecting the
newborn for the first few months of its life. As already stated, a newborn benefits from the IgA antibodies it obtains
from milk during breastfeeding. The fetus and newborn thus benefit from the immunological memory based on the
pathogens to which the pregnant person has been exposed. In medicine, artificially acquired passive immunity
usually involves injections of immunoglobulins, taken from animals previously exposed to a specific pathogen. This
treatment is a fast-acting method of temporarily protecting an individual who was possibly exposed to a pathogen.
The downside to both types of passive immunity is the lack of the development of immunological memory. Once the
antibodies are transferred, they are effective for only a limited time before they degrade.
21.4 • The Adaptive Immune Response: B-lymphocytes and Antibodies
925
INTERACTIVE LINK
Immunity can be acquired in an active or passive way, and it can be natural or artificial. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/immunity) to see an animated discussion of passive and active immunity. What is an example
of natural immunity acquired passively?
T cell-dependent versus T cell-independent Antigens
As discussed previously, Th2 cells secrete cytokines that drive the production of antibodies in a B cell, responding to
complex antigens such as those made by proteins. On the other hand, some antigens are T cell independent. A T
cell-independent antigen usually is in the form of repeated carbohydrate moieties found on the cell walls of
bacteria. Each antibody on the B cell surface has two binding sites, and the repeated nature of T cell-independent
antigen leads to crosslinking of the surface antibodies on the B cell. The crosslinking is enough to activate it in the
absence of T cell cytokines.
A T cell-dependent antigen, on the other hand, usually is not repeated to the same degree on the pathogen and
thus does not crosslink surface antibody with the same efficiency. To elicit a response to such antigens, the B and T
cells must come close together (Figure 21.25). The B cell must receive two signals to become activated. Its surface
immunoglobulin must recognize native antigen. Some of this antigen is internalized, processed, and presented to
the Th2 cells on a class II MHC molecule. The T cell then binds using its antigen receptor and is activated to secrete
cytokines that diffuse to the B cell, finally activating it completely. Thus, the B cell receives signals from both its
surface antibody and the T cell via its cytokines, and acts as a professional antigen-presenting cell in the process.
FIGURE 21.25
T and B Cell Binding
To elicit a response to a T cell-dependent antigen, the B and T cells must come close together. To
become fully activated, the B cell must receive two signals from the native antigen and the T cell’s cytokines.
21.5 The Immune Response against Pathogens
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the development of immunological competence
•
Describe the mucosal immune response
•
Discuss immune responses against bacterial, viral, fungal, and animal pathogens
•
Describe different ways pathogens evade immune responses
Now that you understand the development of mature, naïve B cells and T cells, and some of their major functions,
how do all of these various cells, proteins, and cytokines come together to actually resolve an infection? Ideally, the
immune response will rid the body of a pathogen entirely. The adaptive immune response, with its rapid clonal
expansion, is well suited to this purpose. Think of a primary infection as a race between the pathogen and the
immune system. The pathogen bypasses barrier defenses and starts multiplying in the host’s body. During the first 4
to 5 days, the innate immune response will partially control, but not stop, pathogen growth. As the adaptive immune
response gears up, however, it will begin to clear the pathogen from the body, while at the same time becoming
stronger and stronger. When following antibody responses in patients with a particular disease such as a virus, this
clearance is referred to as seroconversion (sero- = “serum”). Seroconversion is the reciprocal relationship between
virus levels in the blood and antibody levels. As the antibody levels rise, the virus levels decline, and this is a sign
that the immune response is being at least partially effective (partially, because in many diseases, seroconversion
926
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
does not necessarily mean a patient is getting well).
An excellent example of this is seroconversion during HIV disease (Figure 21.26). Notice that antibodies are made
early in this disease, and the increase in anti-HIV antibodies correlates with a decrease in detectable virus in the
blood. Although these antibodies are an important marker for diagnosing the disease, they are not sufficient to
completely clear the virus. Several years later, the vast majority of these individuals, if untreated, will lose their
entire adaptive immune response, including the ability to make antibodies, during the final stages of AIDS.
FIGURE 21.26
HIV Disease Progression
Seroconversion, the rise of anti-HIV antibody levels and the concomitant decline in
measurable virus levels, happens during the first several months of HIV disease. Unfortunately, this antibody response is ineffective at
controlling the disease, as seen by the progression of the disease towards AIDS, in which all adaptive immune responses are compromised.
The Mucosal Immune Response
Mucosal tissues are major barriers to the entry of pathogens into the body. The IgA (and sometimes IgM) antibodies
in mucus and other secretions can bind to the pathogen, and in the cases of many viruses and bacteria, neutralize
them. Neutralization is the process of coating a pathogen with antibodies, making it physically impossible for the
Everyday Connection
Disinfectants: Fighting the Good Fight?
“Wash your hands!” Parents have been telling their children this for generations. Dirty hands can spread
disease. But is it possible to get rid of enough pathogens that children will never get sick? Are children who avoid
exposure to pathogens better off? The answers to both these questions appears to be no.
Antibacterial wipes, soaps, gels, and even toys with antibacterial substances embedded in their plastic are
ubiquitous in our society. Still, these products do not rid the skin and gastrointestinal tract of bacteria, and it
would be harmful to our health if they did. We need these nonpathogenic bacteria on and within our bodies to
keep the pathogenic ones from growing. The urge to keep children perfectly clean is thus probably misguided.
Children will get sick anyway, and the later benefits of immunological memory far outweigh the minor
discomforts of most childhood diseases. In fact, getting diseases such as chickenpox or measles later in life is
much harder on the adult and are associated with symptoms significantly worse than those seen in the
childhood illnesses. Of course, vaccinations help children avoid some illnesses, but there are so many
pathogens, we will never be immune to them all.
Could over-cleanliness be the reason that allergies are increasing in more developed countries? Some scientists
think so. Allergies are based on an IgE antibody response. Many scientists think the system evolved to help the
body rid itself of worm parasites. The hygiene theory is the idea that the immune system is geared to respond to
antigens, and if pathogens are not present, it will respond instead to inappropriate antigens such as allergens
and self-antigens. This is one explanation for the rising incidence of allergies in developed countries, where the
response to nonpathogens like pollen, shrimp, and cat dander cause allergic responses while not serving any
protective function.
21.5 • The Immune Response against Pathogens
927
pathogen to bind to receptors. Neutralization, which occurs in the blood, lymph, and other body fluids and
secretions, protects the body constantly. Neutralizing antibodies are the basis for the disease protection offered by
vaccines. Vaccinations for diseases that commonly enter the body via mucous membranes, such as influenza, are
usually formulated to enhance IgA production.
Immune responses in some mucosal tissues such as the Peyer’s patches (see Figure 21.11) in the small intestine
take up particulate antigens by specialized cells known as microfold or M cells (Figure 21.27). These cells allow the
body to sample potential pathogens from the intestinal lumen. Dendritic cells then take the antigen to the regional
lymph nodes, where an immune response is mounted.
FIGURE 21.27
IgA Immunity
The nasal-associated lymphoid tissue and Peyer’s patches of the small intestine generate IgA immunity.
Both use M cells to transport antigen inside the body so that immune responses can be mounted.
Defenses against Bacteria and Fungi
The body fights bacterial pathogens with a wide variety of immunological mechanisms, essentially trying to find one
that is effective. Bacteria such as Mycobacterium leprae, the cause of leprosy, are resistant to lysosomal enzymes
and can persist in macrophage organelles or escape into the cytosol. In such situations, infected macrophages
receiving cytokine signals from Th1 cells turn on special metabolic pathways. Macrophage oxidative metabolism is
hostile to intracellular bacteria, often relying on the production of nitric oxide to kill the bacteria inside the
macrophage.
Fungal infections, such as those from Aspergillus, Candida, and Pneumocystis, are largely opportunistic infections
that take advantage of suppressed immune responses. Most of the same immune mechanisms effective against
bacteria have similar effects on fungi, both of which have characteristic cell wall structures that protect their cells.
Defenses against Parasites
Worm parasites such as helminths are seen as the primary reason why the mucosal immune response, IgE-
mediated allergy and asthma, and eosinophils evolved. These parasites were at one time very common in human
928
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
society. When infecting a human, often via contaminated food, some worms take up residence in the gastrointestinal
tract. Eosinophils are attracted to the site by T cell cytokines, which release their granule contents upon their arrival.
Mast cell degranulation also occurs, and the fluid leakage caused by the increase in local vascular permeability is
thought to have a flushing action on the parasite, expelling its larvae from the body. Furthermore, if IgE labels the
parasite, the eosinophils can bind to it by its Fc receptor.
Defenses against Viruses
The primary mechanisms against viruses are NK cells, interferons, and cytotoxic T cells. Antibodies are effective
against viruses mostly during protection, where an immune individual can neutralize them based on a previous
exposure. Antibodies have no effect on viruses or other intracellular pathogens once they enter the cell, since
antibodies are not able to penetrate the plasma membrane of the cell. Many cells respond to viral infections by
downregulating their expression of MHC class I molecules. This is to the advantage of the virus, because without
class I expression, cytotoxic T cells have no activity. NK cells, however, can recognize virally infected class I-
negative cells and destroy them. Thus, NK and cytotoxic T cells have complementary activities against virally
infected cells.
Interferons have activity in slowing viral replication and are used in the treatment of certain viral diseases, such as
hepatitis B and C, but their ability to eliminate the virus completely is limited. The cytotoxic T cell response, though,
is key, as it eventually overwhelms the virus and kills infected cells before the virus can complete its replicative
cycle. Clonal expansion and the ability of cytotoxic T cells to kill more than one target cell make these cells
especially effective against viruses. In fact, without cytotoxic T cells, it is likely that humans would all die at some
point from a viral infection (if no vaccine were available).
Evasion of the Immune System by Pathogens
It is important to keep in mind that although the immune system has evolved to be able to control many pathogens,
pathogens themselves have evolved ways to evade the immune response. An example already mentioned is in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which has evolved a complex cell wall that is resistant to the digestive enzymes of the
macrophages that ingest them, and thus persists in the host, causing the chronic disease tuberculosis. This section
briefly summarizes other ways in which pathogens can “outwit” immune responses. But keep in mind, although it
seems as if pathogens have a will of their own, they do not. All of these evasive “strategies” arose strictly by
evolution, driven by selection.
Bacteria sometimes evade immune responses because they exist in multiple strains, such as different groups of
Staphylococcus aureus. S. aureus is commonly found in minor skin infections, such as boils, and some healthy
people harbor it in their nose. One small group of strains of this bacterium, however, called methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, has become resistant to multiple antibiotics and is essentially untreatable. Different
bacterial strains differ in the antigens on their surfaces. The immune response against one strain (antigen) does not
affect the other; thus, the species survives.
Another method of immune evasion is mutation. Because viruses’ surface molecules mutate continuously, viruses
like influenza change enough each year that the flu vaccine for one year may not protect against the flu common to
the next. New vaccine formulations must be derived for each flu season.
Genetic recombination—the combining of gene segments from two different pathogens—is an efficient form of
immune evasion. For example, the influenza virus contains gene segments that can recombine when two different
viruses infect the same cell. Recombination between human and pig influenza viruses led to the 2010 H1N1 swine
flu outbreak.
Pathogens can produce immunosuppressive molecules that impair immune function, and there are several different
types. Viruses are especially good at evading the immune response in this way, and many types of viruses have been
shown to suppress the host immune response in ways much more subtle than the wholesale destruction caused by
HIV.
21.5 • The Immune Response against Pathogens
929
21.6 Diseases Associated with Depressed or Overactive Immune Responses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss inherited and acquired immunodeficiencies
•
Explain the four types of hypersensitivity and how they differ
•
Give an example of how autoimmune disease breaks tolerance
This section is about how the immune system goes wrong. When it goes haywire, and becomes too weak or too
strong, it leads to a state of disease. The factors that maintain immunological homeostasis are complex and
incompletely understood.
Immunodeficiencies
As you have seen, the immune system is quite complex. It has many pathways using many cell types and signals.
Because it is so complex, there are many ways for it to go wrong. Inherited immunodeficiencies arise from gene
mutations that affect specific components of the immune response. There are also acquired immunodeficiencies
with potentially devastating effects on the immune system, such as HIV.
Inherited Immunodeficiencies
A list of all inherited immunodeficiencies is well beyond the scope of this book. The list is almost as long as the list
of cells, proteins, and signaling molecules of the immune system itself. Some deficiencies, such as those for
complement, cause only a higher susceptibility to some Gram-negative bacteria. Others are more severe in their
consequences. Certainly, the most serious of the inherited immunodeficiencies is severe combined
immunodeficiency disease (SCID). This disease is complex because it is caused by many different genetic defects.
What groups them together is the fact that both the B cell and T cell arms of the adaptive immune response are
affected.
Children with this disease usually die of opportunistic infections within their first year of life unless they receive a
bone marrow transplant. Such a procedure had not yet been perfected for David Vetter, the “boy in the bubble,” who
was treated for SCID by having to live almost his entire life in a sterile plastic cocoon for the 12 years before his
death from infection in 1984. One of the features that make bone marrow transplants work as well as they do is the
proliferative capability of hematopoietic stem cells of the bone marrow. Only a small amount of bone marrow from a
healthy donor is given intravenously to the recipient. It finds its own way to the bone where it populates it,
eventually reconstituting the patient’s immune system, which is usually destroyed beforehand by treatment with
radiation or chemotherapeutic drugs.
New treatments for SCID using gene therapy, inserting nondefective genes into cells taken from the patient and
giving them back, have the advantage of not needing the tissue match required for standard transplants. Although
not a standard treatment, this approach holds promise, especially for those in whom standard bone marrow
transplantation has failed.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/AIDS
Although many viruses cause suppression of the immune system, only one wipes it out completely, and that is the
previously mentioned HIV. It is worth discussing the biology of this virus, which can lead to the well-known AIDS, so
that its full effects on the immune system can be understood. The virus is transmitted through semen, vaginal fluids,
and blood, and can be caught by risky sexual behaviors and the sharing of needles by intravenous drug users. There
are sometimes, but not always, flu-like symptoms in the first 1 to 2 weeks after infection. This is later followed by
seroconversion. The anti-HIV antibodies formed during seroconversion are the basis for most initial HIV screening
done in the United States. Because seroconversion takes different lengths of time in different individuals, multiple
AIDS tests are given months apart to confirm or eliminate the possibility of infection.
After seroconversion, the amount of virus circulating in the blood drops and stays at a low level for several years.
During this time, the levels of CD4+ cells, especially helper T cells, decline steadily, until at some point, the immune
response is so weak that opportunistic disease and eventually death result. HIV uses CD4 as the receptor to get
inside cells, but it also needs a co-receptor, such as CCR5 or CXCR4. These co-receptors, which usually bind to
chemokines, present another target for anti-HIV drug development. Although other antigen-presenting cells are
930
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
infected with HIV, given that CD4+ helper T cells play an important role in T cell immune responses and antibody
responses, it should be no surprise that both types of immune responses are eventually seriously compromised.
Treatment for the disease consists of drugs that target virally encoded proteins that are necessary for viral
replication but are absent from normal human cells. By targeting the virus itself and sparing the cells, this approach
has been successful in significantly prolonging the lives of HIV-positive individuals. On the other hand, an HIV
vaccine has been 30 years in development and is still years away. Because the virus mutates rapidly to evade the
immune system, scientists have been looking for parts of the virus that do not change and thus would be good
targets for a vaccine candidate.
Hypersensitivities
The word “hypersensitivity” simply means sensitive beyond normal levels of activation. Allergies and inflammatory
responses to nonpathogenic environmental substances have been observed since the dawn of history.
Hypersensitivity is a medical term describing symptoms that are now known to be caused by unrelated mechanisms
of immunity. Still, it is useful for this discussion to use the four types of hypersensitivities as a guide to understand
these mechanisms (Figure 21.28).
FIGURE 21.28
Immune Hypersensitivity
Components of the immune system cause four types of hypersensitivity. Notice that types
I–III are B cell mediated, whereas type IV hypersensitivity is exclusively a T cell phenomenon.
Immediate (Type I) Hypersensitivity
Antigens that cause allergic responses are often referred to as allergens. The specificity of the immediate
hypersensitivity response is predicated on the binding of allergen-specific IgE to the mast cell surface. The process
of producing allergen-specific IgE is called sensitization, and is a necessary prerequisite for the symptoms of
immediate hypersensitivity to occur. Allergies and allergic asthma are mediated by mast cell degranulation that is
caused by the crosslinking of the antigen-specific IgE molecules on the mast cell surface. The mediators released
have various vasoactive effects already discussed, but the major symptoms of inhaled allergens are the nasal edema
and runny nose caused by the increased vascular permeability and increased blood flow of nasal blood vessels. As
these mediators are released with mast cell degranulation, type I hypersensitivity reactions are usually rapid and
occur within just a few minutes, hence the term immediate hypersensitivity.
21.6 • Diseases Associated with Depressed or Overactive Immune Responses
931
Most allergens are in themselves nonpathogenic and therefore innocuous. Some individuals develop mild allergies,
which are usually treated with antihistamines. Others develop severe allergies that may cause anaphylactic shock,
which can potentially be fatal within 20 to 30 minutes if untreated. This drop in blood pressure (shock) with
accompanying contractions of bronchial smooth muscle is caused by systemic mast cell degranulation when an
allergen is eaten (for example, shellfish and peanuts), injected (by a bee sting or being administered penicillin), or
inhaled (asthma). Because epinephrine raises blood pressure and relaxes bronchial smooth muscle, it is routinely
used to counteract the effects of anaphylaxis and can be lifesaving. Patients with known severe allergies are
encouraged to keep automatic epinephrine injectors with them at all times, especially when away from easy access
to hospitals.
Allergists use skin testing to identify allergens in type I hypersensitivity. In skin testing, allergen extracts are
injected into the epidermis, and a positive result of a soft, pale swelling at the site surrounded by a red zone (called
the wheal and flare response), caused by the release of histamine and the granule mediators, usually occurs within
30 minutes. The soft center is due to fluid leaking from the blood vessels and the redness is caused by the increased
blood flow to the area that results from the dilation of local blood vessels at the site.
Type II and Type III Hypersensitivities
Type II hypersensitivity, which involves IgG-mediated lysis of cells by complement proteins, occurs during
mismatched blood transfusions and blood compatibility diseases such as erythroblastosis fetalis (see section on
transplantation). Type III hypersensitivity occurs with diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, where
soluble antigens, mostly DNA and other material from the nucleus, and antibodies accumulate in the blood to the
point that the antigen and antibody precipitate along blood vessel linings. These immune complexes often lodge in
the kidneys, joints, and other organs where they can activate complement proteins and cause inflammation.
Delayed (Type IV) Hypersensitivity
Delayed hypersensitivity, or type IV hypersensitivity, is basically a standard cellular immune response. In delayed
hypersensitivity, the first exposure to an antigen is called sensitization, such that on re-exposure, a secondary
cellular response results, secreting cytokines that recruit macrophages and other phagocytes to the site. These
sensitized T cells, of the Th1 class, will also activate cytotoxic T cells. The time it takes for this reaction to occur
accounts for the 24- to 72-hour delay in development.
The classical test for delayed hypersensitivity is the tuberculin test for tuberculosis, where bacterial proteins from
M. tuberculosis are injected into the skin. A couple of days later, a positive test is indicated by a raised red area that
is hard to the touch, called an induration, which is a consequence of the cellular infiltrate, an accumulation of
activated macrophages. A positive tuberculin test means that the patient has been exposed to the bacteria and
exhibits a cellular immune response to it.
Another type of delayed hypersensitivity is contact sensitivity, where substances such as the metal nickel cause a
red and swollen area upon contact with the skin. The individual must have been previously sensitized to the metal. A
much more severe case of contact sensitivity is poison ivy, but many of the harshest symptoms of the reaction are
associated with the toxicity of its oils and are not T cell mediated.
Autoimmune Responses
The worst cases of the immune system over-reacting are autoimmune diseases. Somehow, tolerance breaks down
and the immune systems in individuals with these diseases begin to attack their own bodies, causing significant
damage. The trigger for these diseases is, more often than not, unknown, and the treatments are usually based on
resolving the symptoms using immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory drugs such as steroids. These diseases
can be localized and crippling, as in rheumatoid arthritis, or diffuse in the body with multiple symptoms that differ in
different individuals, as is the case with systemic lupus erythematosus (Figure 21.29).
932
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.29
Autoimmune Disorders: Rheumatoid Arthritis and Lupus
(a) Extensive damage to the right hand of a rheumatoid
arthritis sufferer is shown in the x-ray. (b) The diagram shows a variety of possible symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Environmental triggers seem to play large roles in autoimmune responses. One explanation for the breakdown of
tolerance is that, after certain bacterial infections, an immune response to a component of the bacterium cross-
reacts with a self-antigen. This mechanism is seen in rheumatic fever, a result of infection with Streptococcus
bacteria, which causes strep throat. The antibodies to this pathogen’s M protein cross-react with an antigenic
component of heart myosin, a major contractile protein of the heart that is critical to its normal function. The
antibody binds to these molecules and activates complement proteins, causing damage to the heart, especially to
the heart valves. On the other hand, some theories propose that having multiple common infectious diseases
actually prevents autoimmune responses. The fact that autoimmune diseases are rare in countries that have a high
incidence of infectious diseases supports this idea, another example of the hygiene hypothesis discussed earlier in
this chapter.
There are genetic factors in autoimmune diseases as well. Some diseases are associated with the MHC genes that
an individual expresses. The reason for this association is likely because if one’s MHC molecules are not able to
present a certain self-antigen, then that particular autoimmune disease cannot occur. Overall, there are more than
80 different autoimmune diseases, which are a significant health problem in the elderly. Table 21.7 lists several of
the most common autoimmune diseases, the antigens that are targeted, and the segment of the adaptive immune
response that causes the damage.
Autoimmune Diseases
Disease
Autoantigen
Symptoms
Celiac disease
Tissue transglutaminase
Damage to small intestine
Diabetes
mellitus type I
Beta cells of pancreas
Low insulin production; inability to
regulate serum glucose
Graves’
disease
Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (antibody blocks
receptor)
Hyperthyroidism
Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis
Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (antibody
mimics hormone and stimulates receptor)
Hypothyroidism
Lupus
erythematosus
Nuclear DNA and proteins
Damage of many body systems
TABLE 21.7
21.6 • Diseases Associated with Depressed or Overactive Immune Responses
933
Disease
Autoantigen
Symptoms
Myasthenia
gravis
Acetylcholine receptor in neuromuscular junctions
Debilitating muscle weakness
Rheumatoid
arthritis
Joint capsule antigens
Chronic inflammation of joints
TABLE 21.7
21.7 Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain why blood typing is important and what happens when mismatched blood is used in a transfusion
•
Describe how tissue typing is done during organ transplantation and the role of transplant anti-rejection drugs
•
Show how the immune response is able to control some cancers and how this immune response might be
enhanced by cancer vaccines
The immune responses to transplanted organs and to cancer cells are both important medical issues. With the use
of tissue typing and anti-rejection drugs, transplantation of organs and the control of the anti-transplant immune
response have made huge strides in the past 50 years. Today, these procedures are commonplace. Tissue typing is
the determination of MHC molecules in the tissue to be transplanted to better match the donor to the recipient. The
immune response to cancer, on the other hand, has been more difficult to understand and control. Although it is
clear that the immune system can recognize some cancers and control them, others seem to be resistant to immune
mechanisms.
The Rh Factor
Red blood cells can be typed based on their surface antigens. ABO blood type, in which individuals are type A, B, AB,
or O according to their genetics, is one example. A separate antigen system seen on red blood cells is the Rh
antigen. When someone is “A positive” for example, the positive refers to the presence of the Rh antigen, whereas
someone who is “A negative” would lack this molecule.
An interesting consequence of Rh factor expression is seen in erythroblastosis fetalis, a hemolytic disease of the
newborn (Figure 21.30). This disease occurs when people negative for Rh antigen have multiple Rh-positive
children. During the birth of a first Rh-positive child, the birth parent makes a primary anti-Rh antibody response to
the fetal blood cells that enter the pregnant person's bloodstream. If the same parent has a second Rh-positive
child, IgG antibodies against Rh-positive blood mounted during this secondary response cross the placenta and
attack the fetal blood, causing anemia. This is a consequence of the fact that the fetus is not genetically identical to
the birth parent, and thus the parent is capable of mounting an immune response against it. This disease is treated
with antibodies specific for Rh factor. These are given to the pregnant person during the first and subsequent births,
destroying any fetal blood that might enter their system and preventing the immune response.
934
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 21.30
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
Erythroblastosis fetalis (hemolytic disease of the newborn) is the result of an immune response
in an Rh-negative person who has multiple children with an Rh-positive person. During the first birth, fetal blood enters the pregnant
person's circulatory system, and anti-Rh antibodies are made. During the gestation of the second child, these antibodies cross the placenta
and attack the blood of the fetus. The treatment for this disease is to give the carrier anti-Rh antibodies (RhoGAM) during the first
pregnancy to destroy Rh-positive fetal red blood cells from entering their system and causing the anti-Rh antibody response in the first
place.
Tissue Transplantation
Tissue transplantation is more complicated than blood transfusions because of two characteristics of MHC
molecules. These molecules are the major cause of transplant rejection (hence the name “histocompatibility”).
MHC polygeny refers to the multiple MHC proteins on cells, and MHC polymorphism refers to the multiple alleles
for each individual MHC locus. Thus, there are many alleles in the human population that can be expressed (Table
21.8 and Table 21.9). When a donor organ expresses MHC molecules that are different from the recipient, the latter
will often mount a cytotoxic T cell response to the organ and reject it. Histologically, if a biopsy of a transplanted
organ exhibits massive infiltration of T lymphocytes within the first weeks after transplant, it is a sign that the
transplant is likely to fail. The response is a classical, and very specific, primary T cell immune response. As far as
medicine is concerned, the immune response in this scenario does the patient no good at all and causes significant
harm.
21.7 • Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
935
Partial Table of Alleles of the Human MHC (Class I)
Gene
# of alleles
# of possible MHC I protein components
A
2132
1527
B
2798
2110
C
1672
1200
E
11
3
F
22
4
G
50
16
TABLE 21.8
Partial Table of Alleles of the Human MHC (Class II)
Gene
# of alleles
# of possible MHC II protein components
DRA
7
2
DRB
1297
958
DQA1
49
31
DQB1
179
128
DPA1
36
18
DPB1
158
136
DMA
7
4
DMB
13
7
DOA
12
3
DOB
13
5
TABLE 21.9
Immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporine A have made transplants more successful, but matching the MHC
molecules is still key. In humans, there are six MHC molecules that show the most polymorphisms, three class I
molecules (A, B, and C) and three class II molecules called DP, DQ, and DR. A successful transplant usually requires
a match between at least 3–4 of these molecules, with more matches associated with greater success. Family
members, since they share a similar genetic background, are much more likely to share MHC molecules than
unrelated individuals do. In fact, due to the extensive polymorphisms in these MHC molecules, unrelated donors are
found only through a worldwide database. The system is not foolproof however, as there are not enough individuals
in the system to provide the organs necessary to treat all patients needing them.
936
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
One disease of transplantation occurs with bone marrow transplants, which are used to treat various diseases,
including SCID and leukemia. Because the bone marrow cells being transplanted contain lymphocytes capable of
mounting an immune response, and because the recipient’s immune response has been destroyed before receiving
the transplant, the donor cells may attack the recipient tissues, causing graft-versus-host disease. Symptoms of
this disease, which usually include a rash and damage to the liver and mucosa, are variable, and attempts have been
made to moderate the disease by first removing mature T cells from the donor bone marrow before transplanting it.
Immune Responses Against Cancer
It is clear that with some cancers, for example Kaposi’s sarcoma, a healthy immune system does a good job at
controlling them (Figure 21.31). This disease, which is caused by the human herpesvirus, is almost never observed
in individuals with strong immune systems, such as the young and immunocompetent. Other examples of cancers
caused by viruses include liver cancer caused by the hepatitis B virus and cervical cancer caused by the human
papilloma virus. As these last two viruses have vaccines available for them, getting vaccinated can help prevent
these two types of cancer by stimulating the immune response.
FIGURE 21.31
Karposi’s Sarcoma Lesions
(credit: National Cancer Institute)
On the other hand, as cancer cells are often able to divide and mutate rapidly, they may escape the immune
response, just as certain pathogens such as HIV do. There are three stages in the immune response to many
cancers: elimination, equilibrium, and escape. Elimination occurs when the immune response first develops toward
tumor-specific antigens specific to the cancer and actively kills most cancer cells, followed by a period of controlled
equilibrium during which the remaining cancer cells are held in check. Unfortunately, many cancers mutate, so they
no longer express any specific antigens for the immune system to respond to, and a subpopulation of cancer cells
escapes the immune response, continuing the disease process.
This fact has led to extensive research in trying to develop ways to enhance the early immune response to
completely eliminate the early cancer and thus prevent a later escape. One method that has shown some success is
the use of cancer vaccines, which differ from viral and bacterial vaccines in that they are directed against the cells of
one’s own body. Treated cancer cells are injected into cancer patients to enhance their anti-cancer immune
response and thereby prolong survival. The immune system has the capability to detect these cancer cells and
proliferate faster than the cancer cells do, overwhelming the cancer in a similar way as they do for viruses. Cancer
vaccines have been developed for malignant melanoma, a highly fatal skin cancer, and renal (kidney) cell carcinoma.
These vaccines are still in the development stages, but some positive and encouraging results have been obtained
clinically.
It is tempting to focus on the complexity of the immune system and the problems it causes as a negative. The
upside to immunity, however, is so much greater: The benefit of staying alive far outweighs the negatives caused
when the system does sometimes go awry. Working on “autopilot,” the immune system helps to maintain your
health and kill pathogens. The only time you really miss the immune response is when it is not being effective and
illness results, or, as in the extreme case of HIV disease, the immune system is gone completely.
21.7 • Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
937
Everyday Connection
How Stress Affects the Immune Response: The Connections between the Immune,
Nervous, and Endocrine Systems of the Body
The immune system cannot exist in isolation. After all, it has to protect the entire body from infection. Therefore,
the immune system is required to interact with other organ systems, sometimes in complex ways. Thirty years of
research focusing on the connections between the immune system, the central nervous system, and the
endocrine system have led to a new science with the unwieldy name of called psychoneuroimmunology. The
physical connections between these systems have been known for centuries: All primary and secondary organs
are connected to sympathetic nerves. What is more complex, though, is the interaction of neurotransmitters,
hormones, cytokines, and other soluble signaling molecules, and the mechanism of “crosstalk” between the
systems. For example, white blood cells, including lymphocytes and phagocytes, have receptors for various
neurotransmitters released by associated neurons. Additionally, hormones such as cortisol (naturally produced
by the adrenal cortex) and prednisone (synthetic) are well known for their abilities to suppress T cell immune
mechanisms, hence, their prominent use in medicine as long-term, anti-inflammatory drugs.
One well-established interaction of the immune, nervous, and endocrine systems is the effect of stress on
immune health. In the human vertebrate evolutionary past, stress was associated with the fight-or-flight
response, largely mediated by the central nervous system and the adrenal medulla. This stress was necessary
for survival. The physical action of fighting or running, whichever the animal decides, usually resolves the
problem in one way or another. On the other hand, there are no physical actions to resolve most modern day
stresses, including short-term stressors like taking examinations and long-term stressors such as being
unemployed or losing a spouse. The effect of stress can be felt by nearly every organ system, and the immune
system is no exception (Table 21.10).
Effects of Stress on Body Systems
System
Stress-related illness
Integumentary system
Acne, rashes, irritation
Nervous system
Headaches, depression, anxiety, irritability, loss of appetite, lack of motivation,
reduced mental performance
Muscular and skeletal
systems
Muscle and joint pain, neck and shoulder pain
Circulatory system
Increased heart rate, hypertension, increased probability of heart attacks
Digestive system
Indigestion, heartburn, stomach pain, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, weight gain
or loss
Immune system
Depressed ability to fight infections
Male reproductive
system
Lowered sperm production, impotence, reduced sexual desire
Female reproductive
system
Irregular menstrual cycle, reduced sexual desire
TABLE 21.10
938
21 • The Lymphatic and Immune System
Access for free at openstax.org
At one time, it was assumed that all types of stress reduced all aspects of the immune response, but the last few
decades of research have painted a different picture. First, most short-term stress does not impair the immune
system in healthy individuals enough to lead to a greater incidence of diseases. However, older individuals and
those with suppressed immune responses due to disease or immunosuppressive drugs may respond even to
short-term stressors by getting sicker more often. It has been found that short-term stress diverts the body’s
resources towards enhancing innate immune responses, which have the ability to act fast and would seem to
help the body prepare better for possible infections associated with the trauma that may result from a fight-or-
flight exchange. The diverting of resources away from the adaptive immune response, however, causes its own
share of problems in fighting disease.
Chronic stress, unlike short-term stress, may inhibit immune responses even in otherwise healthy adults. The
suppression of both innate and adaptive immune responses is clearly associated with increases in some
diseases, as seen when individuals lose a spouse or have other long-term stresses, such as taking care of a
spouse with a fatal disease or dementia. The new science of psychoneuroimmunology, while still in its relative
infancy, has great potential to make exciting advances in our understanding of how the nervous, endocrine, and
immune systems have evolved together and communicate with each other.
21.7 • Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
939
Key Terms
active immunity
immunity developed from an
individual’s own immune system
acute inflammation
inflammation occurring for a
limited time period; rapidly developing
adaptive immune response
relatively slow but very
specific and effective immune response controlled
by lymphocytes
afferent lymphatic vessels
lead into a lymph node
antibody
antigen-specific protein secreted by plasma
cells; immunoglobulin
antigen
molecule recognized by the receptors of B
and T lymphocytes
antigen presentation
binding of processed antigen to
the protein-binding cleft of a major
histocompatibility complex molecule
antigen processing
internalization and digestion of
antigen in an antigen-presenting cell
antigen receptor
two-chain receptor by which
lymphocytes recognize antigen
antigenic determinant
(also, epitope) one of the
chemical groups recognized by a single type of
lymphocyte antigen receptor
B cells
lymphocytes that act by differentiating into an
antibody-secreting plasma cell
barrier defenses
antipathogen defenses deriving
from a barrier that physically prevents pathogens
from entering the body to establish an infection
bone marrow
tissue found inside bones; the site of
all blood cell differentiation and maturation of B
lymphocytes
bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT)
lymphoid nodule associated with the respiratory
tract
central tolerance
B cell tolerance induced in
immature B cells of the bone marrow
chemokine
soluble, long-range, cell-to-cell
communication molecule
chronic inflammation
inflammation occurring for
long periods of time
chyle
lipid-rich lymph inside the lymphatic capillaries
of the small intestine
cisterna chyli
bag-like vessel that forms the
beginning of the thoracic duct
class switching
ability of B cells to change the class
of antibody they produce without altering the
specificity for antigen
clonal anergy
process whereby B cells that react to
soluble antigens in bone marrow are made
nonfunctional
clonal deletion
removal of self-reactive B cells by
inducing apoptosis
clonal expansion
growth of a clone of selected
lymphocytes
clonal selection
stimulating growth of lymphocytes
that have specific receptors
clone
group of lymphocytes sharing the same antigen
receptor
complement
enzymatic cascade of constitutive blood
proteins that have antipathogen effects, including
the direct killing of bacteria
constant region domain
part of a lymphocyte antigen
receptor that does not vary much between different
receptor types
cytokine
soluble, short-range, cell-to-cell
communication molecule
cytotoxic T cells (Tc)
T lymphocytes with the ability
to induce apoptosis in target cells
delayed hypersensitivity
(type IV) T cell-mediated
immune response against pathogens infiltrating
interstitial tissues, causing cellular infiltrate
early induced immune response
includes
antimicrobial proteins stimulated during the first
several days of an infection
effector T cells
immune cells with a direct, adverse
effect on a pathogen
efferent lymphatic vessels
lead out of a lymph node
erythroblastosis fetalis
disease of Rh factor-positive
newborns in Rh-negative mothers with multiple Rh-
positive children; resulting from the action of
maternal antibodies against fetal blood
fas ligand
molecule expressed on cytotoxic T cells
and NK cells that binds to the fas molecule on a
target cell and induces it do undergo apoptosis
Fc region
in an antibody molecule, the site where the
two termini of the heavy chains come together;
many cells have receptors for this portion of the
antibody, adding functionality to these molecules
germinal centers
clusters of rapidly proliferating B
cells found in secondary lymphoid tissues
graft-versus-host disease
in bone marrow
transplants; occurs when the transplanted cells
mount an immune response against the recipient
granzyme
apoptosis-inducing substance contained in
granules of NK cells and cytotoxic T cells
heavy chain
larger protein chain of an antibody
helper T cells (Th)
T cells that secrete cytokines to
enhance other immune responses, involved in
activation of both B and T cell lymphocytes
high endothelial venules
vessels containing unique
endothelial cells specialized to allow migration of
lymphocytes from the blood to the lymph node
histamine
vasoactive mediator in granules of mast
cells and is the primary cause of allergies and
anaphylactic shock
940
21 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
IgA
antibody whose dimer is secreted by exocrine
glands, is especially effective against digestive and
respiratory pathogens, and can pass immunity to an
infant through breastfeeding
IgD
class of antibody whose only known function is
as a receptor on naive B cells; important in B cell
activation
IgE
antibody that binds to mast cells and causes
antigen-specific degranulation during an allergic
response
IgG
main blood antibody of late primary and early
secondary responses; passed from carrier to unborn
child via placenta
IgM
antibody whose monomer is a surface receptor
of naive B cells; the pentamer is the first antibody
made blood plasma during primary responses
immediate hypersensitivity
(type I) IgE-mediated
mast cell degranulation caused by crosslinking of
surface IgE by antigen
immune system
series of barriers, cells, and soluble
mediators that combine to response to infections of
the body with pathogenic organisms
immunoglobulin
protein antibody; occurs as one of
five main classes
immunological memory
ability of the adaptive
immune response to mount a stronger and faster
immune response upon re-exposure to a pathogen
inflammation
basic innate immune response
characterized by heat, redness, pain, and swelling
innate immune response
rapid but relatively
nonspecific immune response
interferons
early induced proteins made in virally
infected cells that cause nearby cells to make
antiviral proteins
light chain
small protein chain of an antibody
lymph
fluid contained within the lymphatic system
lymph node
one of the bean-shaped organs found
associated with the lymphatic vessels
lymphatic capillaries
smallest of the lymphatic
vessels and the origin of lymph flow
lymphatic system
network of lymphatic vessels,
lymph nodes, and ducts that carries lymph from the
tissues and back to the bloodstream.
lymphatic trunks
large lymphatics that collect lymph
from smaller lymphatic vessels and empties into the
blood via lymphatic ducts
lymphocytes
white blood cells characterized by a
large nucleus and small rim of cytoplasm
lymphoid nodules
unencapsulated patches of
lymphoid tissue found throughout the body
macrophage
ameboid phagocyte found in several
tissues throughout the body
macrophage oxidative metabolism
metabolism
turned on in macrophages by T cell signals that help
destroy intracellular bacteria
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
gene
cluster whose proteins present antigens to T cells
mast cell
cell found in the skin and the lining of body
cells that contains cytoplasmic granules with
vasoactive mediators such as histamine
memory T cells
long-lived immune cell reserved for
future exposure to a pathogen
MHC class I
found on most cells of the body, it binds
to the CD8 molecule on T cells
MHC class II
found on macrophages, dendritic cells,
and B cells, it binds to CD4 molecules on T cells
MHC polygeny
multiple MHC genes and their proteins
found in body cells
MHC polymorphism
multiple alleles for each
individual MHC locus
monocyte
precursor to macrophages and dendritic
cells seen in the blood
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphoid nodule associated with the mucosa
naïve lymphocyte
mature B or T cell that has not yet
encountered antigen for the first time
natural killer cell (NK)
cytotoxic lymphocyte of
innate immune response
negative selection
selection against thymocytes in
the thymus that react with self-antigen
neutralization
inactivation of a virus by the binding of
specific antibody
neutrophil
phagocytic white blood cell recruited from
the bloodstream to the site of infection via the
bloodstream
opsonization
enhancement of phagocytosis by the
binding of antibody or antimicrobial protein
passive immunity
transfer of immunity to a pathogen
to an individual that lacks immunity to this pathogen
usually by the injection of antibodies
pattern recognition receptor (PRR)
leukocyte
receptor that binds to specific cell wall components
of different bacterial species
perforin
molecule in NK cell and cytotoxic T cell
granules that form pores in the membrane of a
target cell
peripheral tolerance
mature B cell made tolerant by
lack of T cell help
phagocytosis
movement of material from the outside
to the inside of the cells via vesicles made from
invaginations of the plasma membrane
plasma cell
differentiated B cell that is actively
secreting antibody
polyclonal response
response by multiple clones to a
complex antigen with many determinants
positive selection
selection of thymocytes within the
21 • Key Terms
941
thymus that interact with self, but not non-self, MHC
molecules
primary adaptive response
immune system’s
response to the first exposure to a pathogen
primary lymphoid organ
site where lymphocytes
mature and proliferate; red bone marrow and
thymus gland
psychoneuroimmunology
study of the connections
between the immune, nervous, and endocrine
systems
regulatory T cells (Treg)
(also, suppressor T cells)
class of CD4 T cells that regulates other T cell
responses
right lymphatic duct
drains lymph fluid from the
upper right side of body into the right subclavian
vein
secondary adaptive response
immune response
observed upon re-exposure to a pathogen, which is
stronger and faster than a primary response
secondary lymphoid organs
sites where
lymphocytes mount adaptive immune responses;
examples include lymph nodes and spleen
sensitization
first exposure to an antigen
seroconversion
clearance of pathogen in the serum
and the simultaneous rise of serum antibody
severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID)
genetic mutation that affects both T cell and B cell
arms of the immune response
spleen
secondary lymphoid organ that filters
pathogens from the blood (white pulp) and removes
degenerating or damaged blood cells (red pulp)
T cell
lymphocyte that acts by secreting molecules
that regulate the immune system or by causing the
destruction of foreign cells, viruses, and cancer cells
T cell tolerance
process during T cell differentiation
where most T cells that recognize antigens from
one’s own body are destroyed
T cell-dependent antigen
antigen that binds to B
cells, which requires signals from T cells to make
antibody
T cell-independent antigen
binds to B cells, which
do not require signals from T cells to make antibody
Th1 cells
cells that secrete cytokines that enhance
the activity of macrophages and other cells
Th2 cells
cells that secrete cytokines that induce B
cells to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma
cells
thoracic duct
large duct that drains lymph from the
lower limbs, left thorax, left upper limb, and the left
side of the head
thymocyte
immature T cell found in the thymus
thymus
primary lymphoid organ; where T
lymphocytes proliferate and mature
tissue typing
typing of MHC molecules between a
recipient and donor for use in a potential
transplantation procedure
tonsils
lymphoid nodules associated with the
nasopharynx
type I hypersensitivity
immediate response
mediated by mast cell degranulation caused by the
crosslinking of the antigen-specific IgE molecules
on the mast cell surface
type II hypersensitivity
cell damage caused by the
binding of antibody and the activation of
complement, usually against red blood cells
type III hypersensitivity
damage to tissues caused
by the deposition of antibody-antigen (immune)
complexes followed by the activation of
complement
variable region domain
part of a lymphocyte antigen
receptor that varies considerably between different
receptor types
Chapter Review
21.1 Anatomy of the Lymphatic and
Immune Systems
The lymphatic system is a series of vessels, ducts, and
trunks that remove interstitial fluid from the tissues
and return it the blood. The lymphatics are also used to
transport dietary lipids and cells of the immune
system. Cells of the immune system all come from the
hematopoietic system of the bone marrow. Primary
lymphoid organs, the bone marrow and thymus gland,
are the locations where lymphocytes of the adaptive
immune system proliferate and mature. Secondary
lymphoid organs are site in which mature lymphocytes
congregate to mount immune responses. Many
immune system cells use the lymphatic and circulatory
systems for transport throughout the body to search
for and then protect against pathogens.
21.2 Barrier Defenses and the Innate
Immune Response
Innate immune responses are critical to the early
control of infections. Whereas barrier defenses are the
body’s first line of physical defense against pathogens,
innate immune responses are the first line of
physiological defense. Innate responses occur rapidly,
but with less specificity and effectiveness than the
adaptive immune response. Innate responses can be
caused by a variety of cells, mediators, and
antibacterial proteins such as complement. Within the
first few days of an infection, another series of
antibacterial proteins are induced, each with activities
942
21 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
against certain bacteria, including opsonization of
certain species. Additionally, interferons are induced
that protect cells from viruses in their vicinity. Finally,
the innate immune response does not stop when the
adaptive immune response is developed. In fact, both
can cooperate and one can influence the other in their
responses against pathogens.
21.3 The Adaptive Immune Response: T
lymphocytes and Their Functional Types
T cells recognize antigens with their antigen receptor, a
complex of two protein chains on their surface. They do
not recognize self-antigens, however, but only
processed antigen presented on their surfaces in a
binding groove of a major histocompatibility complex
molecule. T cells develop in the thymus, where they
learn to use self-MHC molecules to recognize only
foreign antigens, thus making them tolerant to self-
antigens. There are several functional types of T
lymphocytes, the major ones being helper, regulatory,
and cytotoxic T cells.
21.4 The Adaptive Immune Response: B-
lymphocytes and Antibodies
B cells, which develop within the bone marrow, are
responsible for making five different classes of
antibodies, each with its own functions. B cells have
their own mechanisms for tolerance, but in peripheral
tolerance, the B cells that leave the bone marrow
remain inactive due to T cell tolerance. Some B cells do
not need T cell cytokines to make antibody, and they
bypass this need by the crosslinking of their surface
immunoglobulin by repeated carbohydrate residues
found in the cell walls of many bacterial species.
Others require T cells to become activated.
21.5 The Immune Response against
Pathogens
Early childhood is a time when the body develops
much of its immunological memory that protects it
from diseases in adulthood. The components of the
immune response that have the maximum
effectiveness against a pathogen are often associated
with the class of pathogen involved. Bacteria and fungi
are especially susceptible to damage by complement
proteins, whereas viruses are taken care of by
interferons and cytotoxic T cells. Worms are attacked
by eosinophils. Pathogens have shown the ability,
however, to evade the body’s immune responses, some
leading to chronic infections or even death. The
immune system and pathogens are in a slow,
evolutionary race to see who stays on top. Modern
medicine, hopefully, will keep the results skewed in
humans’ favor.
21.6 Diseases Associated with Depressed
or Overactive Immune Responses
The immune response can be under-reactive or over-
reactive. Suppressed immunity can result from
inherited genetic defects or by acquiring viruses. Over-
reactive immune responses include the
hypersensitivities: B cell- and T cell-mediated immune
responses designed to control pathogens, but that lead
to symptoms or medical complications. The worst
cases of over-reactive immune responses are
autoimmune diseases, where an individual’s immune
system attacks their own body because of the
breakdown of immunological tolerance. These
diseases are more common in the aged, so treating
them will be a challenge in the future as the aged
population in the world increases.
21.7 Transplantation and Cancer
Immunology
Blood transfusion and organ transplantation both
require an understanding of the immune response to
prevent medical complications. Blood needs to be
typed so that natural antibodies against mismatched
blood will not destroy it, causing more harm than good
to the recipient. Transplanted organs must be matched
by their MHC molecules and, with the use of
immunosuppressive drugs, can be successful even if an
exact tissue match cannot be made. Another aspect to
the immune response is its ability to control and
eradicate cancer. Although this has been shown to
occur with some rare cancers and those caused by
known viruses, the normal immune response to most
cancers is not sufficient to control cancer growth. Thus,
cancer vaccines designed to enhance these immune
responses show promise for certain types of cancer.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/
lymphsystem) for an overview of the lymphatic
system. What are the three main components of the
lymphatic system?
2. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/
immunecells) to learn about the many different cell
types in the immune system and their very
specialized jobs. What is the role of the dendritic
cell in infection by HIV?
21 • Interactive Link Questions
943
3. Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/
chemotaxis) to learn about phagocyte chemotaxis.
Phagocyte chemotaxis is the movement of
phagocytes according to the secretion of chemical
messengers in the form of interleukins and other
chemokines. By what means does a phagocyte
destroy a bacterium that it has ingested?
4. Immunity can be acquired in an active or passive
way, and it can be natural or artificial. Watch this
video (http://openstax.org/l/immunity) to see an
animated discussion of passive and active
immunity. What is an example of natural immunity
acquired passively?
Review Questions
5. Which of the following cells is phagocytic?
a.
plasma cell
b.
macrophage
c.
B cell
d.
NK cell
6. Which structure allows lymph from the lower right
limb to enter the bloodstream?
a.
thoracic duct
b.
right lymphatic duct
c.
right lymphatic trunk
d.
left lymphatic trunk
7. Which of the following cells is important in the
innate immune response?
a.
B cells
b.
T cells
c.
macrophages
d.
plasma cells
8. Which of the following cells would be most active in
early, antiviral immune responses the first time one
is exposed to pathogen?
a.
macrophage
b.
T cell
c.
neutrophil
d.
natural killer cell
9. Which of the lymphoid nodules is most likely to see
food antigens first?
a.
tonsils
b.
Peyer’s patches
c.
bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue
d.
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
10. Which of the following signs is not characteristic of
inflammation?
a.
redness
b.
pain
c.
cold
d.
swelling
11. Which of the following is not important in the
antiviral innate immune response?
a.
interferons
b.
natural killer cells
c.
complement
d.
microphages
12. Enhanced phagocytosis of a cell by the binding of
a specific protein is called ________.
a.
endocytosis
b.
opsonization
c.
anaphylaxis
d.
complement activation
13. Which of the following leads to the redness of
inflammation?
a.
increased vascular permeability
b.
anaphylactic shock
c.
increased blood flow
d.
complement activation
14. T cells that secrete cytokines that help antibody
responses are called ________.
a.
Th1
b.
Th2
c.
regulatory T cells
d.
thymocytes
15. The taking in of antigen and digesting it for later
presentation is called ________.
a.
antigen presentation
b.
antigen processing
c.
endocytosis
d.
exocytosis
16. Why is clonal expansion so important?
a.
to select for specific cells
b.
to secrete cytokines
c.
to kill target cells
d.
to increase the numbers of specific cells
17. The elimination of self-reactive thymocytes is
called ________.
a.
positive selection.
b.
negative selection.
c.
tolerance.
d.
clonal selection.
944
21 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
18. Which type of T cell is most effective against
viruses?
a.
Th1
b.
Th2
c.
cytotoxic T cells
d.
regulatory T cells
19. Removing functionality from a B cell without killing
it is called ________.
a.
clonal selection
b.
clonal expansion
c.
clonal deletion
d.
clonal anergy
20. Which class of antibody crosses the placenta in
pregnant people?
a.
IgM
b.
IgA
c.
IgE
d.
IgG
21. Which class of antibody has no known function
other than as an antigen receptor?
a.
IgM
b.
IgA
c.
IgE
d.
IgD
22. When does class switching occur?
a.
primary response
b.
secondary response
c.
tolerance
d.
memory response
23. Which class of antibody is found in mucus?
a.
IgM
b.
IgA
c.
IgE
d.
IgD
24. Which enzymes in macrophages are important for
clearing intracellular bacteria?
a.
metabolic
b.
mitochondrial
c.
nuclear
d.
lysosomal
25. What type of chronic lung disease is caused by a
Mycobacterium?
a.
asthma
b.
emphysema
c.
tuberculosis
d.
leprosy
26. Which type of immune response is most directly
effective against bacteria?
a.
natural killer cells
b.
complement
c.
cytotoxic T cells
d.
helper T cells
27. What is the reason that you have to be immunized
with a new influenza vaccine each year?
a.
the vaccine is only protective for a year
b.
mutation
c.
macrophage oxidative metabolism
d.
memory response
28. Which type of immune response works in concert
with cytotoxic T cells against virally infected cells?
a.
natural killer cells
b.
complement
c.
antibodies
d.
memory
29. Which type of hypersensitivity involves soluble
antigen-antibody complexes?
a.
type I
b.
type II
c.
type III
d.
type IV
30. What causes the delay in delayed
hypersensitivity?
a.
inflammation
b.
cytokine release
c.
recruitment of immune cells
d.
histamine release
31. Which of the following is a critical feature of
immediate hypersensitivity?
a.
inflammation
b.
cytotoxic T cells
c.
recruitment of immune cells
d.
histamine release
32. Which of the following is an autoimmune disease
of the heart?
a.
rheumatoid arthritis
b.
lupus
c.
rheumatic fever
d.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
33. What drug is used to counteract the effects of
anaphylactic shock?
a.
epinephrine
b.
antihistamines
c.
antibiotics
d.
aspirin
21 • Review Questions
945
34. Which of the following terms means “many
genes”?
a.
polymorphism
b.
polygeny
c.
polypeptide
d.
multiple alleles
35. Why do we have natural antibodies?
a.
We don’t know why.
b.
immunity to environmental bacteria
c.
immunity to transplants
d.
from clonal selection
36. Which type of cancer is associated with HIV
disease?
a.
Kaposi’s sarcoma
b.
melanoma
c.
lymphoma
d.
renal cell carcinoma
37. How does cyclosporine A work?
a.
suppresses antibodies
b.
suppresses T cells
c.
suppresses macrophages
d.
suppresses neutrophils
38. What disease is associated with bone marrow
transplants?
a.
diabetes mellitus type I
b.
melanoma
c.
headache
d.
graft-versus-host disease
Critical Thinking Questions
39. Describe the flow of lymph from its origins in
interstitial fluid to its emptying into the venous
bloodstream.
40. Describe the process of inflammation in an area
that has been traumatized, but not infected.
41. Describe two early induced responses and what
pathogens they affect.
42. Describe the processing and presentation of an
intracellular antigen.
43. Describe clonal selection and expansion.
44. Describe how secondary B cell responses are
developed.
45. Describe the role of IgM in immunity.
46. Describe how seroconversion works in HIV
disease.
47. Describe tuberculosis and the innocent bystander
effect.
48. Describe anaphylactic shock in someone sensitive
to peanuts?
49. Describe rheumatic fever and how tolerance is
broken.
50. Describe how stress affects immune responses.
946
21 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 22
The Respiratory System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
List the structures of the respiratory system
•
List the major functions of the respiratory system
•
Outline the forces that allow for air movement into and out of the lungs
•
Outline the process of gas exchange
•
Summarize the process of oxygen and carbon dioxide transport within the respiratory system
•
Create a flow chart illustrating how respiration is controlled
•
Discuss how the respiratory system responds to exercise
•
Describe the development of the respiratory system in the embryo
Hold your breath. Really! See how long you can hold your breath as you continue reading…How
long can you do it? Chances are you are feeling uncomfortable already. A typical human cannot survive without
breathing for more than 3 minutes, and even if you wanted to hold your breath longer, your autonomic nervous
system would take control. This is because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages of cellular
respiration, the process by which energy is produced in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). For oxidative
phosphorylation to occur, oxygen is used as a reactant and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. You may
be surprised to learn that although oxygen is a critical need for cells, it is actually the accumulation of carbon dioxide
that primarily drives your need to breathe. Carbon dioxide is exhaled and oxygen is inhaled through the respiratory
system, which includes muscles to move air into and out of the lungs, passageways through which air moves, and
microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries. The circulatory system transports gases from the lungs to
tissues throughout the body and vice versa. A variety of diseases can affect the respiratory system, such as asthma,
emphysema, chronic obstruction pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer. All of these conditions affect the gas
exchange process and result in labored breathing and other difficulties.
Figure 22.1
Mountain Climbers The thin air at high elevations can strain the human respiratory system. (credit:
“bortescristian”/flickr.com)
22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the structures that make up the respiratory system
•
Describe how the respiratory system processes oxygen and CO2
•
Compare and contrast the functions of upper respiratory tract with the lower respiratory tract
The major organs of the respiratory system function primarily to provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular
respiration, remove the waste product carbon dioxide, and help to maintain acid-base balance. Portions of the
respiratory system are also used for non-vital functions, such as sensing odors, speech production, and for straining,
such as during childbirth or coughing (Figure 22.2).
FIGURE 22.2
Major Respiratory Structures
The major respiratory structures span the nasal cavity to the diaphragm.
Functionally, the respiratory system can be divided into a conducting zone and a respiratory zone. The conducting
zone of the respiratory system includes the organs and structures not directly involved in gas exchange. The gas
exchange occurs in the respiratory zone.
Conducting Zone
The major functions of the conducting zone are to provide a route for incoming and outgoing air, remove debris and
pathogens from the incoming air, and warm and humidify the incoming air. Several structures within the conducting
zone perform other functions as well. The epithelium of the nasal passages, for example, is essential to sensing
odors, and the bronchial epithelium that lines the lungs can metabolize some airborne carcinogens.
The Nose and its Adjacent Structures
The major entrance and exit for the respiratory system is through the nose. When discussing the nose, it is helpful to
divide it into two major sections: the external nose, and the nasal cavity or internal nose.
The external nose consists of the surface and skeletal structures that result in the outward appearance of the nose
and contribute to its numerous functions (Figure 22.3). The root is the region of the nose located between the
eyebrows. The bridge is the part of the nose that connects the root to the rest of the nose. The dorsum nasi is the
length of the nose. The apex is the tip of the nose. On either side of the apex, the nostrils are formed by the alae
(singular = ala). An ala is a cartilaginous structure that forms the lateral side of each naris (plural = nares), or nostril
opening. The philtrum is the concave surface that connects the apex of the nose to the upper lip.
948
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.3
Nose
This illustration shows features of the external nose (top) and skeletal features of the nose (bottom).
Underneath the thin skin of the nose are its skeletal features (see Figure 22.3, lower illustration). While the root and
bridge of the nose consist of bone, the protruding portion of the nose is composed of cartilage. As a result, when
looking at a skull, the nose is missing. The nasal bone is one of a pair of bones that lies under the root and bridge of
the nose. The nasal bone articulates superiorly with the frontal bone and laterally with the maxillary bones. Septal
cartilage is flexible hyaline cartilage connected to the nasal bone, forming the dorsum nasi. The alar cartilage
consists of the apex of the nose; it surrounds the naris.
The nares open into the nasal cavity, which is separated into left and right sections by the nasal septum (Figure
22.4). The nasal septum is formed anteriorly by a portion of the septal cartilage (the flexible portion you can touch
with your fingers) and posteriorly by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone (a cranial bone located just
posterior to the nasal bones) and the thin vomer bones (whose name refers to its plough shape). Each lateral wall of
the nasal cavity has three bony projections, called the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae. The inferior
conchae are separate bones, whereas the superior and middle conchae are portions of the ethmoid bone. Conchae
serve to increase the surface area of the nasal cavity and to disrupt the flow of air as it enters the nose, causing air
to bounce along the epithelium, where it is cleaned and warmed. The conchae and meatuses also conserve water
and prevent dehydration of the nasal epithelium by trapping water during exhalation. The floor of the nasal cavity is
composed of the palate. The hard palate at the anterior region of the nasal cavity is composed of bone. The soft
palate at the posterior portion of the nasal cavity consists of muscle tissue. Air exits the nasal cavities via the
internal nares and moves into the pharynx.
22.1 • Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
949
FIGURE 22.4
Upper Airway
Several bones that help form the walls of the nasal cavity have air-containing spaces called the paranasal sinuses,
which serve to warm and humidify incoming air. Sinuses are lined with a mucosa. Each paranasal sinus is named for
its associated bone: frontal sinus, maxillary sinus, sphenoidal sinus, and ethmoidal sinus. The sinuses produce
mucus and lighten the weight of the skull.
The nares and anterior portion of the nasal cavities are lined with mucous membranes, containing sebaceous glands
and hair follicles that serve to prevent the passage of large debris, such as dirt, through the nasal cavity. An olfactory
epithelium used to detect odors is found deeper in the nasal cavity.
The conchae, meatuses, and paranasal sinuses are lined by respiratory epithelium composed of pseudostratified
ciliated columnar epithelium (Figure 22.5). The epithelium contains goblet cells, one of the specialized, columnar
epithelial cells that produce mucus to trap debris. The cilia of the respiratory epithelium help remove the mucus and
debris from the nasal cavity with a constant beating motion, sweeping materials towards the throat to be swallowed.
Interestingly, cold air slows the movement of the cilia, resulting in accumulation of mucus that may in turn lead to a
runny nose during cold weather. This moist epithelium functions to warm and humidify incoming air. Capillaries
located just beneath the nasal epithelium warm the air by convection. Serous and mucus-producing cells also
secrete the lysozyme enzyme and proteins called defensins, which have antibacterial properties. Immune cells that
patrol the connective tissue deep to the respiratory epithelium provide additional protection.
950
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.5
Pseudostratified Ciliated Columnar Epithelium
Respiratory epithelium is pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium.
Seromucous glands provide lubricating mucus. LM × 680. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/pseudoMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube formed by skeletal muscle and lined by mucous membrane that is continuous with that of the
nasal cavities (see Figure 22.4). The pharynx is divided into three major regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx,
and the laryngopharynx (Figure 22.6).
FIGURE 22.6
Divisions of the Pharynx
The pharynx is divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the
laryngopharynx.
22.1 • Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
951
The nasopharynx is flanked by the conchae of the nasal cavity, and it serves only as an airway. At the top of the
nasopharynx are the pharyngeal tonsils. A pharyngeal tonsil, also called an adenoid, is an aggregate of lymphoid
reticular tissue similar to a lymph node that lies at the superior portion of the nasopharynx. The function of the
pharyngeal tonsil is not well understood, but it contains a rich supply of lymphocytes and is covered with ciliated
epithelium that traps and destroys invading pathogens that enter during inhalation. The pharyngeal tonsils are large
in children, but interestingly, tend to regress with age and may even disappear. The uvula is a small bulbous,
teardrop-shaped structure located at the apex of the soft palate. Both the uvula and soft palate move like a
pendulum during swallowing, swinging upward to close off the nasopharynx to prevent ingested materials from
entering the nasal cavity. In addition, auditory (Eustachian) tubes that connect to each middle ear cavity open into
the nasopharynx. This connection is why colds often lead to ear infections.
The oropharynx is a passageway for both air and food. The oropharynx is bordered superiorly by the nasopharynx
and anteriorly by the oral cavity. The fauces is the opening at the connection between the oral cavity and the
oropharynx. As the nasopharynx becomes the oropharynx, the epithelium changes from pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium to stratified squamous epithelium. The oropharynx contains two distinct sets of tonsils, the
palatine and lingual tonsils. A palatine tonsil is one of a pair of structures located laterally in the oropharynx in the
area of the fauces. The lingual tonsil is located at the base of the tongue. Similar to the pharyngeal tonsil, the
palatine and lingual tonsils are composed of lymphoid tissue, and trap and destroy pathogens entering the body
through the oral or nasal cavities.
The laryngopharynx is inferior to the oropharynx and posterior to the larynx. It continues the route for ingested
material and air until its inferior end, where the digestive and respiratory systems diverge. The stratified squamous
epithelium of the oropharynx is continuous with the laryngopharynx. Anteriorly, the laryngopharynx opens into the
larynx, whereas posteriorly, it enters the esophagus.
Larynx
The larynx is a cartilaginous structure inferior to the laryngopharynx that connects the pharynx to the trachea and
helps regulate the volume of air that enters and leaves the lungs (Figure 22.7). The structure of the larynx is formed
by several pieces of cartilage. Three large cartilage pieces—the thyroid cartilage (anterior), epiglottis (superior), and
cricoid cartilage (inferior)—form the major structure of the larynx. The thyroid cartilage is the largest piece of
cartilage that makes up the larynx. The thyroid cartilage consists of the laryngeal prominence, or “Adam’s apple,”
which tends to be more prominent in males. The thick cricoid cartilage forms a ring, with a wide posterior region
and a thinner anterior region. Three smaller, paired cartilages—the arytenoids, corniculates, and cuneiforms—attach
to the epiglottis and the vocal cords and muscle that help move the vocal cords to produce speech.
952
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.7
Larynx
The larynx extends from the laryngopharynx and the hyoid bone to the trachea.
The epiglottis, attached to the thyroid cartilage, is a very flexible piece of elastic cartilage that covers the opening of
the trachea (see Figure 22.4). When in the “closed” position, the unattached end of the epiglottis rests on the
glottis. The glottis is composed of the vestibular folds, the true vocal cords, and the space between these folds
(Figure 22.8). A vestibular fold, or false vocal cord, is one of a pair of folded sections of mucous membrane. A true
vocal cord is one of the white, membranous folds attached by muscle to the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages of the
larynx on their outer edges. The inner edges of the true vocal cords are free, allowing oscillation to produce sound.
The size of the membranous folds of the true vocal cords differs between individuals, producing voices with different
pitch ranges. Folds in males tend to be larger than those in females, which create a deeper voice. The act of
swallowing causes the pharynx and larynx to lift upward, allowing the pharynx to expand and the epiglottis of the
larynx to swing downward, closing the opening to the trachea. These movements produce a larger area for food to
pass through, while preventing food and beverages from entering the trachea.
22.1 • Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
953
FIGURE 22.8
Vocal Cords
The true vocal cords and vestibular folds of the larynx are viewed inferiorly from the laryngopharynx.
Continuous with the laryngopharynx, the superior portion of the larynx is lined with stratified squamous epithelium,
transitioning into pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium that contains goblet cells. Similar to the nasal cavity
and nasopharynx, this specialized epithelium produces mucus to trap debris and pathogens as they enter the
trachea. The cilia beat the mucus upward towards the laryngopharynx, where it can be swallowed down the
esophagus.
Trachea
The trachea (windpipe) extends from the larynx toward the lungs (Figure 22.9a). The trachea is formed by 16 to 20
stacked, C-shaped pieces of hyaline cartilage that are connected by dense connective tissue. The trachealis muscle
and elastic connective tissue together form the fibroelastic membrane, a flexible membrane that closes the
posterior surface of the trachea, connecting the C-shaped cartilages. The fibroelastic membrane allows the trachea
to stretch and expand slightly during inhalation and exhalation, whereas the rings of cartilage provide structural
support and prevent the trachea from collapsing. In addition, the trachealis muscle can be contracted to force air
through the trachea during exhalation. The trachea is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium,
which is continuous with the larynx. The esophagus borders the trachea posteriorly.
954
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.9
Trachea
(a) The tracheal tube is formed by stacked, C-shaped pieces of hyaline cartilage. (b) The layer visible in this
cross-section of tracheal wall tissue between the hyaline cartilage and the lumen of the trachea is the mucosa, which is composed of
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium that contains goblet cells. LM × 1220. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Bronchial Tree
The trachea branches into the right and left primary bronchi at the carina. These bronchi are also lined by
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium containing mucus-producing goblet cells (Figure 22.9b). The carina is
a raised structure that contains specialized nervous tissue that induces violent coughing if a foreign body, such as
food, is present. Rings of cartilage, similar to those of the trachea, support the structure of the bronchi and prevent
their collapse. The primary bronchi enter the lungs at the hilum, a concave region where blood vessels, lymphatic
vessels, and nerves also enter the lungs. The bronchi continue to branch into a bronchial tree. A bronchial tree (or
respiratory tree) is the collective term used for these multiple-branched bronchi. The main function of the bronchi,
like other conducting zone structures, is to provide a passageway for air to move into and out of each lung. In
addition, the mucous membrane traps debris and pathogens.
A bronchiole branches from the tertiary bronchi. Bronchioles, which are about 1 mm in diameter, further branch
until they become the tiny terminal bronchioles, which lead to the structures of gas exchange. There are more than
1000 terminal bronchioles in each lung. The muscular walls of the bronchioles do not contain cartilage like those of
the bronchi. This muscular wall can change the size of the tubing to increase or decrease airflow through the tube.
Respiratory Zone
In contrast to the conducting zone, the respiratory zone includes structures that are directly involved in gas
exchange. The respiratory zone begins where the terminal bronchioles join a respiratory bronchiole, the smallest
type of bronchiole (Figure 22.10), which then leads to an alveolar duct, opening into a cluster of alveoli.
22.1 • Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
955
FIGURE 22.10
Respiratory Zone
Bronchioles lead to alveolar sacs in the respiratory zone, where gas exchange occurs.
Alveoli
An alveolar duct is a tube composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue, which opens into a cluster of alveoli.
An alveolus is one of the many small, grape-like sacs that are attached to the alveolar ducts.
An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus is
approximately 200 μm in diameter with elastic walls that allow the alveolus to stretch during air intake, which
greatly increases the surface area available for gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbors by alveolar
pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli and lung (Figure 22.11).
956
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.11
Structures of the Respiratory Zone
(a) The alveolus is responsible for gas exchange. (b) A micrograph shows the
alveolar structures within lung tissue. LM × 178. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The alveolar wall consists of three major cell types: type I alveolar cells, type II alveolar cells, and alveolar
macrophages. A type I alveolar cell is a squamous epithelial cell of the alveoli, which constitute up to 97 percent of
the alveolar surface area. These cells are about 25 nm thick and are highly permeable to gases. A type II alveolar
cell is interspersed among the type I cells and secretes pulmonary surfactant, a substance composed of
phospholipids and proteins that reduces the surface tension of the alveoli. Roaming around the alveolar wall is the
alveolar macrophage, a phagocytic cell of the immune system that removes debris and pathogens that have
reached the alveoli.
The simple squamous epithelium formed by type I alveolar cells is attached to a thin, elastic basement membrane.
This epithelium is extremely thin and borders the endothelial membrane of capillaries. Taken together, the alveoli
and capillary membranes form a respiratory membrane that is approximately 0.5 μm (micrometers) thick. The
respiratory membrane allows gases to cross by simple diffusion, allowing oxygen to be picked up by the blood for
transport and CO2 to be released into the air of the alveoli.
Diseases of the…
Respiratory System: Asthma
Asthma is common condition that affects the lungs in both adults and children.
Approximately 8.2 percent of adults (18.7 million) and 9.4 percent of children (7 million) in the United States
suffer from asthma. In addition, asthma is the most frequent cause of hospitalization in children.
Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation and edema of the airway, and bronchospasms (that
is, constriction of the bronchioles), which can inhibit air from entering the lungs. In addition, excessive mucus
secretion can occur, which further contributes to airway occlusion (Figure 22.12). Cells of the immune system,
such as eosinophils and mononuclear cells, may also be involved in infiltrating the walls of the bronchi and
bronchioles.
Bronchospasms occur periodically and lead to an “asthma attack.” An attack may be triggered by environmental
factors such as dust, pollen, pet hair, or dander, changes in the weather, mold, tobacco smoke, and respiratory
infections, or by exercise and stress.
22.1 • Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
957
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/asthma) to learn more about what happens during an asthma attack. What are
the three changes that occur inside the airways during an asthma attack?
FIGURE 22.12
Normal and Bronchial Asthma Tissues
(a) Normal lung tissue does not have the characteristics of lung tissue
during (b) an asthma attack, which include thickened mucosa, increased mucus-producing goblet cells, and eosinophil infiltrates.
Symptoms of an asthma attack involve coughing, shortness of breath, wheezing, and tightness of the chest.
Symptoms of a severe asthma attack that requires immediate medical attention would include difficulty
breathing that results in blue (cyanotic) lips or face, confusion, drowsiness, a rapid pulse, sweating, and severe
anxiety. The severity of the condition, frequency of attacks, and identified triggers influence the type of
medication that an individual may require. Longer-term treatments are used for those with more severe asthma.
Short-term, fast-acting drugs that are used to treat an asthma attack are typically administered via an inhaler.
For young children or individuals who have difficulty using an inhaler, asthma medications can be administered
via a nebulizer.
In many cases, the underlying cause of the condition is unknown. However, recent research has demonstrated
that certain viruses, such as human rhinovirus C (HRVC), and the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae and
Chlamydia pneumoniae that are contracted in infancy or early childhood, may contribute to the development of
many cases of asthma.
958
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
22.2 The Lungs
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the overall function of the lung
•
Summarize the blood flow pattern associated with the lungs
•
Outline the anatomy of the blood supply to the lungs
•
Describe the pleura of the lungs and their function
A major organ of the respiratory system, each lung houses structures of both the conducting and respiratory zones.
The main function of the lungs is to perform the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with air from the
atmosphere. To this end, the lungs exchange respiratory gases across a very large epithelial surface area—about 70
square meters—that is highly permeable to gases.
Gross Anatomy of the Lungs
The lungs are pyramid-shaped, paired organs that are connected to the trachea by the right and left bronchi; on the
inferior surface, the lungs are bordered by the diaphragm. The diaphragm is a dome-shaped muscle located at the
base of the lungs and thoracic cavity. The lungs are enclosed by the pleurae, which are attached to the mediastinum.
The right lung is shorter and wider than the left lung, and the left lung occupies a smaller volume than the right. The
cardiac notch is an indentation on the surface of the left lung, and it allows space for the heart (Figure 22.13). The
apex of the lung is the superior region, whereas the base is the opposite region near the diaphragm. The costal
surface of the lung borders the ribs. The mediastinal surface faces the midline.
FIGURE 22.13
Gross Anatomy of the Lungs
Each lung is composed of smaller units called lobes. Fissures separate these lobes from each other. The right lung
consists of three lobes: the superior, middle, and inferior lobes. The left lung consists of two lobes: the superior and
inferior lobes. A bronchopulmonary segment is a division of a lobe, and each lobe houses multiple
bronchopulmonary segments. Each segment receives air from its own tertiary bronchus and is supplied with blood
by its own artery. Some diseases of the lungs typically affect one or more bronchopulmonary segments, and in some
cases, the diseased segments can be surgically removed with little influence on neighboring segments. A pulmonary
lobule is a subdivision formed as the bronchi branch into bronchioles. Each lobule receives its own large bronchiole
that has multiple branches. An interlobular septum is a wall, composed of connective tissue, which separates
lobules from one another.
Blood Supply and Nervous Innervation of the Lungs
The blood supply of the lungs plays an important role in gas exchange and serves as a transport system for gases
22.2 • The Lungs
959
throughout the body. In addition, innervation by the both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems
provides an important level of control through dilation and constriction of the airway.
Blood Supply
The major function of the lungs is to perform gas exchange, which requires blood from the pulmonary circulation.
This blood supply contains deoxygenated blood and travels to the lungs where erythrocytes, also known as red
blood cells, pick up oxygen to be transported to tissues throughout the body. The pulmonary artery is an artery that
arises from the pulmonary trunk and carries deoxygenated, arterial blood to the alveoli. The pulmonary artery
branches multiple times as it follows the bronchi, and each branch becomes progressively smaller in diameter. One
arteriole and an accompanying venule supply and drain one pulmonary lobule. As they near the alveoli, the
pulmonary arteries become the pulmonary capillary network. The pulmonary capillary network consists of tiny
vessels with very thin walls that lack smooth muscle fibers. The capillaries branch and follow the bronchioles and
structure of the alveoli. It is at this point that the capillary wall meets the alveolar wall, creating the respiratory
membrane. Once the blood is oxygenated, it drains from the alveoli by way of multiple pulmonary veins, which exit
the lungs through the hilum.
Nervous Innervation
Dilation and constriction of the airway are achieved through nervous control by the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous systems. The parasympathetic system causes bronchoconstriction, whereas the sympathetic
nervous system stimulates bronchodilation. Reflexes such as coughing, and the ability of the lungs to regulate
oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, also result from this autonomic nervous system control. Sensory nerve fibers arise
from the vagus nerve, and from the second to fifth thoracic ganglia. The pulmonary plexus is a region on the lung
root formed by the entrance of the nerves at the hilum. The nerves then follow the bronchi in the lungs and branch
to innervate muscle fibers, glands, and blood vessels.
Pleura of the Lungs
Each lung is enclosed within a cavity that is surrounded by the pleura. The pleura (plural = pleurae) is a serous
membrane that surrounds the lung. The right and left pleurae, which enclose the right and left lungs, respectively,
are separated by the mediastinum. The pleurae consist of two layers. The visceral pleura is the layer that is
superficial to the lungs, and extends into and lines the lung fissures (Figure 22.14). In contrast, the parietal pleura
is the outer layer that connects to the thoracic wall, the mediastinum, and the diaphragm. The visceral and parietal
pleurae connect to each other at the hilum. The pleural cavity is the space between the visceral and parietal layers.
FIGURE 22.14
Parietal and Visceral Pleurae of the Lungs
960
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
The pleurae perform two major functions: They produce pleural fluid and create cavities that separate the major
organs. Pleural fluid is secreted by mesothelial cells from both pleural layers and acts to lubricate their surfaces.
This lubrication reduces friction between the two layers to prevent trauma during breathing, and creates surface
tension that helps maintain the position of the lungs against the thoracic wall. This adhesive characteristic of the
pleural fluid causes the lungs to enlarge when the thoracic wall expands during ventilation, allowing the lungs to fill
with air. The pleurae also create a division between major organs that prevents interference due to the movement of
the organs, while preventing the spread of infection.
22.3 The Process of Breathing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the mechanisms that drive breathing
•
Discuss how pressure, volume, and resistance are related
•
List the steps involved in pulmonary ventilation
•
Discuss the physical factors related to breathing
•
Discuss the meaning of respiratory volume and capacities
•
Define respiratory rate
•
Outline the mechanisms behind the control of breathing
•
Describe the respiratory centers of the medulla oblongata
•
Describe the respiratory centers of the pons
•
Discuss factors that can influence the respiratory rate
Pulmonary ventilation is the act of breathing, which can be described as the movement of air into and out of the
lungs. The major mechanisms that drive pulmonary ventilation are atmospheric pressure (Patm); the air pressure
within the alveoli, called intra-alveolar pressure (Palv); and the pressure within the pleural cavity, called intrapleural
pressure (Pip).
Mechanisms of Breathing
The intra-alveolar and intrapleural pressures are dependent on certain physical features of the lung. However, the
Everyday Connection
The Effects of Second-Hand Tobacco Smoke
The burning of a tobacco cigarette creates multiple chemical compounds that are released through mainstream
smoke, which is inhaled by the smoker, and through sidestream smoke, which is the smoke that is given off by
the burning cigarette. Second-hand smoke, which is a combination of sidestream smoke and the mainstream
smoke that is exhaled by the smoker, has been demonstrated by numerous scientific studies to cause disease.
At least 40 chemicals in sidestream smoke have been identified that negatively impact human health, leading to
the development of cancer or other conditions, such as immune system dysfunction, liver toxicity, cardiac
arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, and neurological dysfunction. Furthermore, second-hand smoke has been
found to harbor at least 250 compounds that are known to be toxic, carcinogenic, or both. Some major classes
of carcinogens in second-hand smoke are polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), N-nitrosamines, aromatic amines,
formaldehyde, and acetaldehyde.
Tobacco and second-hand smoke are considered to be carcinogenic. Exposure to second-hand smoke can cause
lung cancer in individuals who are not tobacco users themselves. It is estimated that the risk of developing lung
cancer is increased by up to 30 percent in nonsmokers who live with an individual who smokes in the house, as
compared to nonsmokers who are not regularly exposed to second-hand smoke. Children are especially affected
by second-hand smoke. Children who live with an individual who smokes inside the home have a larger number
of lower respiratory infections, which are associated with hospitalizations, and higher risk of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS). Second-hand smoke in the home has also been linked to a greater number of ear infections in
children, as well as worsening symptoms of asthma.
22.3 • The Process of Breathing
961
ability to breathe—to have air enter the lungs during inspiration and air leave the lungs during expiration—is
dependent on the air pressure of the atmosphere and the air pressure within the lungs.
Pressure Relationships
Inspiration (or inhalation) and expiration (or exhalation) are dependent on the differences in pressure between the
atmosphere and the lungs. In a gas, pressure is a force created by the movement of gas molecules that are
confined. For example, a certain number of gas molecules in a two-liter container has more room than the same
number of gas molecules in a one-liter container (Figure 22.15). In this case, the force exerted by the movement of
the gas molecules against the walls of the two-liter container is lower than the force exerted by the gas molecules in
the one-liter container. Therefore, the pressure is lower in the two-liter container and higher in the one-liter
container. At a constant temperature, changing the volume occupied by the gas changes the pressure, as does
changing the number of gas molecules. Boyle’s law describes the relationship between volume and pressure in a
gas at a constant temperature. Boyle discovered that the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume: If
volume increases, pressure decreases. Likewise, if volume decreases, pressure increases. Pressure and volume are
inversely related (P = k/V). Therefore, the pressure in the one-liter container (one-half the volume of the two-liter
container) would be twice the pressure in the two-liter container. Boyle’s law is expressed by the following formula:
In this formula, P1 represents the initial pressure and V1 represents the initial volume, whereas the final pressure
and volume are represented by P2 and V2, respectively. If the two- and one-liter containers were connected by a
tube and the volume of one of the containers were changed, then the gases would move from higher pressure (lower
volume) to lower pressure (higher volume).
FIGURE 22.15
Boyle's Law
In a gas, pressure increases as volume decreases.
Pulmonary ventilation is dependent on three types of pressure: atmospheric, intra-alveolar, and intrapleural.
Atmospheric pressure is the amount of force that is exerted by gases in the air surrounding any given surface, such
as the body. Atmospheric pressure can be expressed in terms of the unit atmosphere, abbreviated atm, or in
millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). One atm is equal to 760 mm Hg, which is the atmospheric pressure at sea level.
Typically, for respiration, other pressure values are discussed in relation to atmospheric pressure. Therefore,
962
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
negative pressure is pressure lower than the atmospheric pressure, whereas positive pressure is pressure that it is
greater than the atmospheric pressure. A pressure that is equal to the atmospheric pressure is expressed as zero.
Intra-alveolar pressure (intrapulmonary pressure) is the pressure of the air within the alveoli, which changes
during the different phases of breathing (Figure 22.16). Because the alveoli are connected to the atmosphere via the
tubing of the airways (similar to the two- and one-liter containers in the example above), the intrapulmonary
pressure of the alveoli always equalizes with the atmospheric pressure.
FIGURE 22.16
Intrapulmonary and Intrapleural Pressure Relationships
Intra-alveolar pressure changes during the different phases
of the cycle. It equalizes at 760 mm Hg but does not remain at 760 mm Hg.
Intrapleural pressure is the pressure of the air within the pleural cavity, between the visceral and parietal pleurae.
Similar to intra-alveolar pressure, intrapleural pressure also changes during the different phases of breathing.
However, due to certain characteristics of the lungs, the intrapleural pressure is always lower than, or negative to,
the intra-alveolar pressure (and therefore also to atmospheric pressure). Although it fluctuates during inspiration
and expiration, intrapleural pressure remains approximately –4 mm Hg throughout the breathing cycle.
Competing forces within the thorax cause the formation of the negative intrapleural pressure. One of these forces
relates to the elasticity of the lungs themselves—elastic tissue pulls the lungs inward, away from the thoracic wall.
Surface tension of alveolar fluid, which is mostly water, also creates an inward pull of the lung tissue. This inward
tension from the lungs is countered by opposing forces from the pleural fluid and thoracic wall. Surface tension
within the pleural cavity pulls the lungs outward. Too much or too little pleural fluid would hinder the creation of the
negative intrapleural pressure; therefore, the level must be closely monitored by the mesothelial cells and drained
by the lymphatic system. Since the parietal pleura is attached to the thoracic wall, the natural elasticity of the chest
wall opposes the inward pull of the lungs. Ultimately, the outward pull is slightly greater than the inward pull,
creating the –4 mm Hg intrapleural pressure relative to the intra-alveolar pressure. Transpulmonary pressure is the
difference between the intrapleural and intra-alveolar pressures, and it determines the size of the lungs. A higher
transpulmonary pressure corresponds to a larger lung.
Physical Factors Affecting Ventilation
In addition to the differences in pressures, breathing is also dependent upon the contraction and relaxation of
muscle fibers of both the diaphragm and thorax. The lungs themselves are passive during breathing, meaning they
are not involved in creating the movement that helps inspiration and expiration. This is because of the adhesive
nature of the pleural fluid, which allows the lungs to be pulled outward when the thoracic wall moves during
inspiration. The recoil of the thoracic wall during expiration causes compression of the lungs. Contraction and
22.3 • The Process of Breathing
963
relaxation of the diaphragm and intercostals muscles (found between the ribs) cause most of the pressure changes
that result in inspiration and expiration. These muscle movements and subsequent pressure changes cause air to
either rush in or be forced out of the lungs.
Other characteristics of the lungs influence the effort that must be expended to ventilate. Resistance is a force that
slows motion, in this case, the flow of gases. The size of the airway is the primary factor affecting resistance. A small
tubular diameter forces air through a smaller space, causing more collisions of air molecules with the walls of the
airways. The following formula helps to describe the relationship between airway resistance and pressure changes:
As noted earlier, there is surface tension within the alveoli caused by water present in the lining of the alveoli. This
surface tension tends to inhibit expansion of the alveoli. However, pulmonary surfactant secreted by type II alveolar
cells mixes with that water and helps reduce this surface tension. Without pulmonary surfactant, the alveoli would
collapse during expiration.
Thoracic wall compliance is the ability of the thoracic wall to stretch while under pressure. This can also affect the
effort expended in the process of breathing. In order for inspiration to occur, the thoracic cavity must expand. The
expansion of the thoracic cavity directly influences the capacity of the lungs to expand. If the tissues of the thoracic
wall are not very compliant, it will be difficult to expand the thorax to increase the size of the lungs.
Pulmonary Ventilation
The difference in pressures drives pulmonary ventilation because air flows down a pressure gradient, that is, air
flows from an area of higher pressure to an area of lower pressure. Air flows into the lungs largely due to a difference
in pressure; atmospheric pressure is greater than intra-alveolar pressure, and intra-alveolar pressure is greater than
intrapleural pressure. Air flows out of the lungs during expiration based on the same principle; pressure within the
lungs becomes greater than the atmospheric pressure.
Pulmonary ventilation comprises two major steps: inspiration and expiration. Inspiration is the process that causes
air to enter the lungs, and expiration is the process that causes air to leave the lungs (Figure 22.17). A respiratory
cycle is one sequence of inspiration and expiration. In general, two muscle groups are used during normal
inspiration: the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles. Additional muscles can be used if a bigger breath is
required. When the diaphragm contracts, it moves inferiorly toward the abdominal cavity, creating a larger thoracic
cavity and more space for the lungs. Contraction of the external intercostal muscles moves the ribs upward and
outward, causing the rib cage to expand, which increases the volume of the thoracic cavity. Due to the adhesive
force of the pleural fluid, the expansion of the thoracic cavity forces the lungs to stretch and expand as well. This
increase in volume leads to a decrease in intra-alveolar pressure, creating a pressure lower than atmospheric
pressure. As a result, a pressure gradient is created that drives air into the lungs.
964
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 22.17
Inspiration and Expiration
Inspiration and expiration occur due to the expansion and contraction of the thoracic cavity,
respectively.
The process of normal expiration is passive, meaning that energy is not required to push air out of the lungs.
Instead, the elasticity of the lung tissue causes the lung to recoil, as the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax
following inspiration. In turn, the thoracic cavity and lungs decrease in volume, causing an increase in
intrapulmonary pressure. The intrapulmonary pressure rises above atmospheric pressure, creating a pressure
gradient that causes air to leave the lungs.
There are different types, or modes, of breathing that require a slightly different process to allow inspiration and
expiration. Quiet breathing, also known as eupnea, is a mode of breathing that occurs at rest and does not require
the cognitive thought of the individual. During quiet breathing, the diaphragm and external intercostals must
contract.
A deep breath, called diaphragmatic breathing, requires the diaphragm to contract. As the diaphragm relaxes, air
passively leaves the lungs. A shallow breath, called costal breathing, requires contraction of the intercostal muscles.
As the intercostal muscles relax, air passively leaves the lungs.
In contrast, forced breathing, also known as hyperpnea, is a mode of breathing that can occur during exercise or
actions that require the active manipulation of breathing, such as singing. During forced breathing, inspiration and
expiration both occur due to muscle contractions. In addition to the contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal
muscles, other accessory muscles must also contract. During forced inspiration, muscles of the neck, including the
scalenes, contract and lift the thoracic wall, increasing lung volume. During forced expiration, accessory muscles of
the abdomen, including the obliques, contract, forcing abdominal organs upward against the diaphragm. This helps
to push the diaphragm further into the thorax, pushing more air out. In addition, accessory muscles (primarily the
internal intercostals) help to compress the rib cage, which also reduces the volume of the thoracic cavity.
Respiratory Volumes and Capacities
Respiratory volume is the term used for various volumes of air moved by or associated with the lungs at a given
point in the respiratory cycle. There are four major types of respiratory volumes: tidal, residual, inspiratory reserve,
and expiratory reserve (Figure 22.18). Tidal volume (TV) is the amount of air that normally enters the lungs during
quiet breathing, which is about 500 milliliters. Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) is the amount of air you can
forcefully exhale past a normal tidal expiration, up to 1200 milliliters for males. Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) is
produced by a deep inhalation, past a tidal inspiration. This is the extra volume that can be brought into the lungs
during a forced inspiration. Residual volume (RV) is the air left in the lungs if you exhale as much air as possible.
The residual volume makes breathing easier by preventing the alveoli from collapsing. Respiratory volume is
22.3 • The Process of Breathing
965
dependent on a variety of factors, and measuring the different types of respiratory volumes can provide important
clues about a person’s respiratory health (Figure 22.19).
FIGURE 22.18
Respiratory Volumes and Capacities
These two graphs show (a) respiratory volumes and (b) the combination of
volumes that results in respiratory capacity.
FIGURE 22.19
Pulmonary Function Testing
Respiratory capacity is the combination of two or more selected volumes, which further describes the amount of air
in the lungs during a given time. For example, total lung capacity (TLC) is the sum of all of the lung volumes (TV,
ERV, IRV, and RV), which represents the total amount of air a person can hold in the lungs after a forceful inhalation.
TLC is about 6000 mL air for males, and about 4200 mL for females. Vital capacity (VC) is the amount of air a
person can move into or out of their lungs, and is the sum of all of the volumes except residual volume (TV, ERV, and
IRV), which is between 4000 and 5000 milliliters. Inspiratory capacity (IC) is the maximum amount of air that can
be inhaled past a normal tidal expiration, is the sum of the tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume. On the other
hand, the functional residual capacity (FRC) is the amount of air that remains in the lung after a normal tidal
expiration; it is the sum of expiratory reserve volume and residual volume (see Figure 22.18).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/spirometers) to learn more about lung volumes and spirometers. Explain
how spirometry test results can be used to diagnose respiratory diseases or determine the effectiveness of disease
treatment.
966
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
In addition to the air that creates respiratory volumes, the respiratory system also contains anatomical dead space,
which is air that is present in the airway that never reaches the alveoli and therefore never participates in gas
exchange. Alveolar dead space involves air found within alveoli that are unable to function, such as those affected
by disease or abnormal blood flow. Total dead space is the anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space
together, and represents all of the air in the respiratory system that is not being used in the gas exchange process.
Respiratory Rate and Control of Ventilation
Breathing usually occurs without thought, although at times you can consciously control it, such as when you swim
under water, sing a song, or blow bubbles. The respiratory rate is the total number of breaths, or respiratory cycles,
that occur each minute. Respiratory rate can be an important indicator of disease, as the rate may increase or
decrease during an illness or in a disease condition. The respiratory rate is controlled by the respiratory center
located within the medulla oblongata in the brain, which responds primarily to changes in carbon dioxide, oxygen,
and pH levels in the blood.
The normal respiratory rate of a child decreases from birth to adolescence. A child under 1 year of age has a normal
respiratory rate between 30 and 60 breaths per minute, but by the time a child is about 10 years old, the normal
rate is closer to 18 to 30. By adolescence, the normal respiratory rate is similar to that of adults, 12 to 18 breaths
per minute.
Ventilation Control Centers
The control of ventilation is a complex interplay of multiple regions in the brain that signal the muscles used in
pulmonary ventilation to contract (Table 22.1). The result is typically a rhythmic, consistent ventilation rate that
provides the body with sufficient amounts of oxygen, while adequately removing carbon dioxide.
Summary of Ventilation Regulation
System component
Function
Medullary respiratory center
Sets the basic rhythm of breathing
Ventral respiratory group
(VRG)
Generates the breathing rhythm and integrates data coming into the medulla
Dorsal respiratory group
(DRG)
Integrates input from the stretch receptors and the chemoreceptors in the
periphery
Pontine respiratory group
(PRG)
Influences and modifies the medulla oblongata’s functions
Aortic body
Monitors blood PCO2, PO2, and pH
Carotid body
Monitors blood PCO2, PO2, and pH
Hypothalamus
Monitors emotional state and body temperature
Cortical areas of the brain
Control voluntary breathing
Proprioceptors
Send impulses regarding joint and muscle movements
Pulmonary irritant reflexes
Protect the respiratory zones of the system from foreign material
Inflation reflex
Protects the lungs from over-inflating
TABLE 22.1
22.3 • The Process of Breathing
967
Neurons that innervate the muscles of the respiratory system are responsible for controlling and regulating
pulmonary ventilation. The major brain centers involved in pulmonary ventilation are the medulla oblongata and the
pontine respiratory group (Figure 22.20).
FIGURE 22.20
Respiratory Centers of the Brain
The medulla oblongata contains the dorsal respiratory group (DRG) and the ventral respiratory group (VRG). The
DRG is involved in maintaining a constant breathing rhythm by stimulating the diaphragm and intercostal muscles to
contract, resulting in inspiration. When activity in the DRG ceases, it no longer stimulates the diaphragm and
intercostals to contract, allowing them to relax, resulting in expiration. The VRG is involved in forced breathing, as
the neurons in the VRG stimulate the accessory muscles involved in forced breathing to contract, resulting in forced
inspiration. The VRG also stimulates the accessory muscles involved in forced expiration to contract.
The second respiratory center of the brain is located within the pons, called the pontine respiratory group, and
consists of the apneustic and pneumotaxic centers. The apneustic center is a double cluster of neuronal cell bodies
that stimulate neurons in the DRG, controlling the depth of inspiration, particularly for deep breathing. The
pneumotaxic center is a network of neurons that inhibits the activity of neurons in the DRG, allowing relaxation
after inspiration, and thus controlling the overall rate.
968
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
Factors That Affect the Rate and Depth of Respiration
The respiratory rate and the depth of inspiration are regulated by the medulla oblongata and pons; however, these
regions of the brain do so in response to systemic stimuli. It is a dose-response, negative-feedback relationship in
which the greater the stimulus, the greater the response. Thus, increasing stimuli results in forced breathing.
Multiple systemic factors are involved in stimulating the brain to produce pulmonary ventilation.
The major factor that stimulates the medulla oblongata and pons to produce respiration is surprisingly not oxygen
concentration, but rather the concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood. As you recall, carbon dioxide is a waste
product of cellular respiration and can be toxic. Concentrations of chemicals are sensed by chemoreceptors. A
central chemoreceptor is one of the specialized receptors that are located in the brain and brainstem, whereas a
peripheral chemoreceptor is one of the specialized receptors located in the carotid arteries and aortic arch.
Concentration changes in certain substances, such as carbon dioxide or hydrogen ions, stimulate these receptors,
which in turn signal the respiration centers of the brain. In the case of carbon dioxide, as the concentration of CO2 in
the blood increases, it readily diffuses across the blood-brain barrier, where it collects in the extracellular fluid. As
will be explained in more detail later, increased carbon dioxide levels lead to increased levels of hydrogen ions,
decreasing pH. The increase in hydrogen ions in the brain triggers the central chemoreceptors to stimulate the
respiratory centers to initiate contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles. As a result, the rate and depth
of respiration increase, allowing more carbon dioxide to be expelled, which brings more air into and out of the lungs
promoting a reduction in the blood levels of carbon dioxide, and therefore hydrogen ions, in the blood. In contrast,
low levels of carbon dioxide in the blood cause low levels of hydrogen ions in the brain, leading to a decrease in the
rate and depth of pulmonary ventilation, producing shallow, slow breathing.
Another factor involved in influencing the respiratory activity of the brain is systemic arterial concentrations of
hydrogen ions. Increasing carbon dioxide levels can lead to increased H+ levels, as mentioned above, as well as
other metabolic activities, such as lactic acid accumulation after strenuous exercise. Peripheral chemoreceptors of
the aortic arch and carotid arteries sense arterial levels of hydrogen ions. When peripheral chemoreceptors sense
decreasing, or more acidic, pH levels, they stimulate an increase in ventilation to remove carbon dioxide from the
blood at a quicker rate. Removal of carbon dioxide from the blood helps to reduce hydrogen ions, thus increasing
systemic pH.
Blood levels of oxygen are also important in influencing respiratory rate. The peripheral chemoreceptors are
responsible for sensing large changes in blood oxygen levels. If blood oxygen levels become quite low—about 60
mm Hg or less—then peripheral chemoreceptors stimulate an increase in respiratory activity. The chemoreceptors
are only able to sense dissolved oxygen molecules, not the oxygen that is bound to hemoglobin. As you recall, the
majority of oxygen is bound by hemoglobin; when dissolved levels of oxygen drop, hemoglobin releases oxygen.
Therefore, a large drop in oxygen levels is required to stimulate the chemoreceptors of the aortic arch and carotid
arteries.
The hypothalamus and other brain regions associated with the limbic system also play roles in influencing the
regulation of breathing by interacting with the respiratory centers. The hypothalamus and other regions associated
with the limbic system are involved in regulating respiration in response to emotions, pain, and temperature. For
example, an increase in body temperature causes an increase in respiratory rate. Feeling excited or the fight-or-
flight response will also result in an increase in respiratory rate.
Disorders of the...
Respiratory System: Sleep Apnea
Sleep apnea is a chronic disorder that can occur in children or adults, and is characterized by the cessation of
breathing during sleep. These episodes may last for several seconds or several minutes, and may differ in the
frequency with which they are experienced. Sleep apnea leads to poor sleep, which is reflected in the symptoms
of fatigue, evening napping, irritability, memory problems, and morning headaches. In addition, many individuals
with sleep apnea experience a dry throat in the morning after waking from sleep, which may be due to excessive
snoring.
There are two types of sleep apnea: obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea is
22.3 • The Process of Breathing
969
22.4 Gas Exchange
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare the composition of atmospheric air and alveolar air
•
Describe the mechanisms that drive gas exchange
•
Discuss the importance of sufficient ventilation and perfusion, and how the body adapts when they are
insufficient
•
Discuss the process of external respiration
•
Describe the process of internal respiration
The purpose of the respiratory system is to perform gas exchange. Pulmonary ventilation provides air to the alveoli
for this gas exchange process. At the respiratory membrane, where the alveolar and capillary walls meet, gases
move across the membranes, with oxygen entering the bloodstream and carbon dioxide exiting. It is through this
mechanism that blood is oxygenated and carbon dioxide, the waste product of cellular respiration, is removed from
the body.
Gas Exchange
In order to understand the mechanisms of gas exchange in the lung, it is important to understand the underlying
principles of gases and their behavior. In addition to Boyle’s law, several other gas laws help to describe the
behavior of gases.
Gas Laws and Air Composition
Gas molecules exert force on the surfaces with which they are in contact; this force is called pressure. In natural
systems, gases are normally present as a mixture of different types of molecules. For example, the atmosphere
consists of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and other gaseous molecules, and this gaseous mixture exerts a
certain pressure referred to as atmospheric pressure (Table 22.2). Partial pressure (Px) is the pressure of a single
type of gas in a mixture of gases. For example, in the atmosphere, oxygen exerts a partial pressure, and nitrogen
exerts another partial pressure, independent of the partial pressure of oxygen (Figure 22.21). Total pressure is the
sum of all the partial pressures of a gaseous mixture. Dalton’s law describes the behavior of nonreactive gases in a
caused by an obstruction of the airway during sleep, which can occur at different points in the airway, depending
on the underlying cause of the obstruction. For example, the tongue and throat muscles of some individuals with
obstructive sleep apnea may relax excessively, causing the muscles to push into the airway. Another example is
obesity, which is a known risk factor for sleep apnea, as excess adipose tissue in the neck region can push the
soft tissues towards the lumen of the airway, causing the trachea to narrow.
In central sleep apnea, the respiratory centers of the brain do not respond properly to rising carbon dioxide
levels and therefore do not stimulate the contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles regularly. As a
result, inspiration does not occur and breathing stops for a short period. In some cases, the cause of central
sleep apnea is unknown. However, some medical conditions, such as stroke and congestive heart failure, may
cause damage to the pons or medulla oblongata. In addition, some pharmacologic agents, such as morphine,
can affect the respiratory centers, causing a decrease in the respiratory rate. The symptoms of central sleep
apnea are similar to those of obstructive sleep apnea.
A diagnosis of sleep apnea is usually done during a sleep study, where the patient is monitored in a sleep
laboratory for several nights. The patient’s blood oxygen levels, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure
are monitored, as are brain activity and the volume of air that is inhaled and exhaled. Treatment of sleep apnea
commonly includes the use of a device called a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine during
sleep. The CPAP machine has a mask that covers the nose, or the nose and mouth, and forces air into the airway
at regular intervals. This pressurized air can help to gently force the airway to remain open, allowing more
normal ventilation to occur. Other treatments include lifestyle changes to decrease weight, eliminate alcohol
and other sleep apnea–promoting drugs, and changes in sleep position. In addition to these treatments,
patients with central sleep apnea may need supplemental oxygen during sleep.
970
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
gaseous mixture and states that a specific gas type in a mixture exerts its own pressure; thus, the total pressure
exerted by a mixture of gases is the sum of the partial pressures of the gases in the mixture.
Partial Pressures of Atmospheric Gases
Gas
Percent of total composition
Partial pressure
(mm Hg)
Nitrogen (N2)
78.6
597.4
Oxygen (O2)
20.9
158.8
Water (H2O)
0.4
3.0
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
0.04
0.3
Others
0.06
0.5
Total composition/total atmospheric pressure
100%
760.0
TABLE 22.2
FIGURE 22.21
Partial and Total Pressures of a Gas
Partial pressure is the force exerted by a gas. The sum of the partial pressures of
all the gases in a mixture equals the total pressure.
Partial pressure is extremely important in predicting the movement of gases. Recall that gases tend to equalize their
pressure in two regions that are connected. A gas will move from an area where its partial pressure is higher to an
area where its partial pressure is lower. In addition, the greater the partial pressure difference between the two
areas, the more rapid is the movement of gases.
Solubility of Gases in Liquids
Henry’s law describes the behavior of gases when they come into contact with a liquid, such as blood. Henry’s law
states that the concentration of gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the solubility and partial pressure of that
gas. The greater the partial pressure of the gas, the greater the number of gas molecules that will dissolve in the
liquid. The concentration of the gas in a liquid is also dependent on the solubility of the gas in the liquid. For
example, although nitrogen is present in the atmosphere, very little nitrogen dissolves into the blood, because the
solubility of nitrogen in blood is very low. The exception to this occurs in scuba divers; the composition of the
compressed air that divers breathe causes nitrogen to have a higher partial pressure than normal, causing it to
dissolve in the blood in greater amounts than normal. Too much nitrogen in the bloodstream results in a serious
condition that can be fatal if not corrected. Gas molecules establish an equilibrium between those molecules
dissolved in liquid and those in air.
The composition of air in the atmosphere and in the alveoli differs. In both cases, the relative concentration of gases
is nitrogen > oxygen > water vapor > carbon dioxide. The amount of water vapor present in alveolar air is greater
than that in atmospheric air (Table 22.3). Recall that the respiratory system works to humidify incoming air, thereby
causing the air present in the alveoli to have a greater amount of water vapor than atmospheric air. In addition,
alveolar air contains a greater amount of carbon dioxide and less oxygen than atmospheric air. This is no surprise, as
22.4 • Gas Exchange
971
gas exchange removes oxygen from and adds carbon dioxide to alveolar air. Both deep and forced breathing cause
the alveolar air composition to be changed more rapidly than during quiet breathing. As a result, the partial
pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide change, affecting the diffusion process that moves these materials across
the membrane. This will cause oxygen to enter and carbon dioxide to leave the blood more quickly.
Composition and Partial Pressures of Alveolar Air
Gas
Percent of total composition
Partial pressure
(mm Hg)
Nitrogen (N2)
74.9
569
Oxygen (O2)
13.7
104
Water (H2O)
6.2
40
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
5.2
47
Total composition/total alveolar pressure
100%
760.0
TABLE 22.3
Ventilation and Perfusion
Two important aspects of gas exchange in the lung are ventilation and perfusion. Ventilation is the movement of air
into and out of the lungs, and perfusion is the flow of blood in the pulmonary capillaries. For gas exchange to be
efficient, the volumes involved in ventilation and perfusion should be compatible. However, factors such as regional
gravity effects on blood, blocked alveolar ducts, or disease can cause ventilation and perfusion to be imbalanced.
The partial pressure of oxygen in alveolar air is about 104 mm Hg, whereas the partial pressure of oxygenated blood
in pulmonary veins is about 100 mm Hg. When ventilation is sufficient, oxygen enters the alveoli at a high rate, and
the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli remains high. In contrast, when ventilation is insufficient, the partial
pressure of oxygen in the alveoli drops. Without the large difference in partial pressure between the alveoli and the
blood, oxygen does not diffuse efficiently across the respiratory membrane. The body has mechanisms that
counteract this problem. In cases when ventilation is not sufficient for an alveolus, the body redirects blood flow to
alveoli that are receiving sufficient ventilation. This is achieved by constricting the pulmonary arterioles that serves
the dysfunctional alveolus, which redirects blood to other alveoli that have sufficient ventilation. At the same time,
the pulmonary arterioles that serve alveoli receiving sufficient ventilation vasodilate, which brings in greater blood
flow. Factors such as carbon dioxide, oxygen, and pH levels can all serve as stimuli for adjusting blood flow in the
capillary networks associated with the alveoli.
Ventilation is regulated by the diameter of the airways, whereas perfusion is regulated by the diameter of the blood
vessels. The diameter of the bronchioles is sensitive to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli. A greater
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli causes the bronchioles to increase their diameter as will a
decreased level of oxygen in the blood supply, allowing carbon dioxide to be exhaled from the body at a greater rate.
As mentioned above, a greater partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli causes the pulmonary arterioles to dilate,
increasing blood flow.
Gas Exchange
Gas exchange occurs at two sites in the body: in the lungs, where oxygen is picked up and carbon dioxide is released
at the respiratory membrane, and at the tissues, where oxygen is released and carbon dioxide is picked up. External
respiration is the exchange of gases with the external environment, and occurs in the alveoli of the lungs. Internal
respiration is the exchange of gases with the internal environment, and occurs in the tissues. The actual exchange of
gases occurs due to simple diffusion. Energy is not required to move oxygen or carbon dioxide across membranes.
Instead, these gases follow pressure gradients that allow them to diffuse. The anatomy of the lung maximizes the
972
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
diffusion of gases: The respiratory membrane is highly permeable to gases; the respiratory and blood capillary
membranes are very thin; and there is a large surface area throughout the lungs.
External Respiration
The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated blood into the lungs from the heart, where it branches and eventually
becomes the capillary network composed of pulmonary capillaries. These pulmonary capillaries create the
respiratory membrane with the alveoli (Figure 22.22). As the blood is pumped through this capillary network, gas
exchange occurs. Although a small amount of the oxygen is able to dissolve directly into plasma from the alveoli,
most of the oxygen is picked up by erythrocytes (red blood cells) and binds to a protein called hemoglobin, a process
described later in this chapter. Oxygenated hemoglobin is red, causing the overall appearance of bright red
oxygenated blood, which returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins. Carbon dioxide is released in the
opposite direction of oxygen, from the blood to the alveoli. Some of the carbon dioxide is returned on hemoglobin,
but can also be dissolved in plasma or is present as a converted form, also explained in greater detail later in this
chapter.
External respiration occurs as a function of partial pressure differences in oxygen and carbon dioxide between the
alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries.
FIGURE 22.22
External Respiration
In external respiration, oxygen diffuses across the respiratory membrane from the alveolus to the
capillary, whereas carbon dioxide diffuses out of the capillary into the alveolus.
Although the solubility of oxygen in blood is not high, there is a drastic difference in the partial pressure of oxygen in
the alveoli versus in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries. This difference is about 64 mm Hg: The partial pressure
of oxygen in the alveoli is about 104 mm Hg, whereas its partial pressure in the blood of the capillary is about 40
mm Hg. This large difference in partial pressure creates a very strong pressure gradient that causes oxygen to
rapidly cross the respiratory membrane from the alveoli into the blood.
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is also different between the alveolar air and the blood of the capillary.
However, the partial pressure difference is less than that of oxygen, about 5 mm Hg. The partial pressure of carbon
dioxide in the blood of the capillary is about 45 mm Hg, whereas its partial pressure in the alveoli is about 40 mm
Hg. However, the solubility of carbon dioxide is much greater than that of oxygen—by a factor of about 20—in both
blood and alveolar fluids. As a result, the relative concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide that diffuse across
the respiratory membrane are similar.
Internal Respiration
Internal respiration is gas exchange that occurs at the level of body tissues (Figure 22.23). Similar to external
respiration, internal respiration also occurs as simple diffusion due to a partial pressure gradient. However, the
partial pressure gradients are opposite of those present at the respiratory membrane. The partial pressure of oxygen
in tissues is low, about 40 mm Hg, because oxygen is continuously used for cellular respiration. In contrast, the
partial pressure of oxygen in the blood is about 100 mm Hg. This creates a pressure gradient that causes oxygen to
dissociate from hemoglobin, diffuse out of the blood, cross the interstitial space, and enter the tissue. Hemoglobin
22.4 • Gas Exchange
973
that has little oxygen bound to it loses much of its brightness, so that blood returning to the heart is more burgundy
in color.
Considering that cellular respiration continuously produces carbon dioxide, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is
lower in the blood than it is in the tissue, causing carbon dioxide to diffuse out of the tissue, cross the interstitial
fluid, and enter the blood. It is then carried back to the lungs either bound to hemoglobin, dissolved in plasma, or in
a converted form. By the time blood returns to the heart, the partial pressure of oxygen has returned to about 40
mm Hg, and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide has returned to about 45 mm Hg. The blood is then pumped back
to the lungs to be oxygenated once again during external respiration.
FIGURE 22.23
Internal Respiration
Oxygen diffuses out of the capillary and into cells, whereas carbon dioxide diffuses out of cells and
into the capillary.
Everyday Connection
Hyperbaric Chamber Treatment
A type of device used in some areas of medicine that exploits the behavior of gases is hyperbaric chamber
treatment. A hyperbaric chamber is a unit that can be sealed and expose a patient to either 100 percent oxygen
with increased pressure or a mixture of gases that includes a higher concentration of oxygen than normal
atmospheric air, also at a higher partial pressure than the atmosphere. There are two major types of chambers:
monoplace and multiplace. Monoplace chambers are typically for one patient, and the staff tending to the
patient observes the patient from outside of the chamber (Figure 22.24). Some facilities have special monoplace
hyperbaric chambers that allow multiple patients to be treated at once, usually in a sitting or reclining position,
to help ease feelings of isolation or claustrophobia. Multiplace chambers are large enough for multiple patients
to be treated at one time, and the staff attending these patients is present inside the chamber. In a multiplace
chamber, patients are often treated with air via a mask or hood, and the chamber is pressurized.
974
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
22.5 Transport of Gases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the principles of oxygen transport
•
Describe the structure of hemoglobin
•
Compare and contrast fetal and adult hemoglobin
•
Describe the principles of carbon dioxide transport
The other major activity in the lungs is the process of respiration, the process of gas exchange. The function of
respiration is to provide oxygen for use by body cells during cellular respiration and to eliminate carbon dioxide, a
waste product of cellular respiration, from the body. In order for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide to
occur, both gases must be transported between the external and internal respiration sites. Although carbon dioxide
is more soluble than oxygen in blood, both gases require a specialized transport system for the majority of the gas
molecules to be moved between the lungs and other tissues.
Oxygen Transport in the Blood
Even though oxygen is transported via the blood, you may recall that oxygen is not very soluble in liquids. A small
amount of oxygen does dissolve in the blood and is transported in the bloodstream, but it is only about 1.5% of the
FIGURE 22.24
Hyperbaric Chamber
(credit: “komunews”/flickr.com)
Hyperbaric chamber treatment is based on the behavior of gases. As you recall, gases move from a region of
higher partial pressure to a region of lower partial pressure. In a hyperbaric chamber, the atmospheric pressure
is increased, causing a greater amount of oxygen than normal to diffuse into the bloodstream of the patient.
Hyperbaric chamber therapy is used to treat a variety of medical problems, such as wound and graft healing,
anaerobic bacterial infections, and carbon monoxide poisoning. Exposure to and poisoning by carbon monoxide
is difficult to reverse, because hemoglobin’s affinity for carbon monoxide is much stronger than its affinity for
oxygen, causing carbon monoxide to replace oxygen in the blood. Hyperbaric chamber therapy can treat carbon
monoxide poisoning, because the increased atmospheric pressure causes more oxygen to diffuse into the
bloodstream. At this increased pressure and increased concentration of oxygen, carbon monoxide is displaced
from hemoglobin. Another example is the treatment of anaerobic bacterial infections, which are created by
bacteria that cannot or prefer not to live in the presence of oxygen. An increase in blood and tissue levels of
oxygen helps to kill the anaerobic bacteria that are responsible for the infection, as oxygen is toxic to anaerobic
bacteria. For wounds and grafts, the chamber stimulates the healing process by increasing energy production
needed for repair. Increasing oxygen transport allows cells to ramp up cellular respiration and thus ATP
production, the energy needed to build new structures.
22.5 • Transport of Gases
975
total amount. The majority of oxygen molecules are carried from the lungs to the body’s tissues by a specialized
transport system, which relies on the erythrocyte—the red blood cell. Erythrocytes contain a metalloprotein,
hemoglobin, which serves to bind oxygen molecules to the erythrocyte (Figure 22.25). Heme is the portion of
hemoglobin that contains iron, and it is heme that binds oxygen. Each hemoglobin molecule contains four iron-
containing heme molecules, and because of this, one hemoglobin molecule is capable of carrying up to four
molecules of oxygen. As oxygen diffuses across the respiratory membrane from the alveolus to the capillary, it also
diffuses into the red blood cell and is bound by hemoglobin. The following reversible chemical reaction describes
the production of the final product, oxyhemoglobin (HbO2), which is formed when oxygen binds to hemoglobin.
Oxyhemoglobin is a bright red-colored molecule that contributes to the bright red color of oxygenated blood.
In this formula, Hb represents reduced hemoglobin, that is, hemoglobin that does not have oxygen bound to it.
There are multiple factors involved in how readily heme binds to and dissociates from oxygen, which will be
discussed in the subsequent sections.
FIGURE 22.25
Erythrocyte and Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin consists of four subunits, each of which contains one molecule of iron.
Function of Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin is composed of subunits, a protein structure that is referred to as a quaternary structure. Each of the
four subunits that make up hemoglobin is arranged in a ring-like fashion, with an iron atom covalently bound to the
heme in the center of each subunit. Binding of the first oxygen molecule causes a conformational change in
hemoglobin that allows the second molecule of oxygen to bind more readily. As each molecule of oxygen is bound, it
further facilitates the binding of the next molecule, until all four heme sites are occupied by oxygen. The opposite
occurs as well: After the first oxygen molecule dissociates and is “dropped off” at the tissues, the next oxygen
molecule dissociates more readily. When all four heme sites are occupied, the hemoglobin is said to be saturated.
When one to three heme sites are occupied, the hemoglobin is said to be partially saturated. Therefore, when
considering the blood as a whole, the percent of the available heme units that are bound to oxygen at a given time is
called hemoglobin saturation. Hemoglobin saturation of 100 percent means that every heme unit in all of the
erythrocytes of the body is bound to oxygen. In a healthy individual with normal hemoglobin levels, hemoglobin
saturation generally ranges from 95 percent to 99 percent.
Oxygen Dissociation from Hemoglobin
Partial pressure is an important aspect of the binding of oxygen to and disassociation from heme. An
oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve is a graph that describes the relationship of partial pressure to the binding
of oxygen to heme and its subsequent dissociation from heme (Figure 22.26). Remember that gases travel from an
area of higher partial pressure to an area of lower partial pressure. In addition, the affinity of an oxygen molecule for
heme increases as more oxygen molecules are bound. Therefore, in the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation curve, as the
976
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
partial pressure of oxygen increases, a proportionately greater number of oxygen molecules are bound by heme. Not
surprisingly, the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve also shows that the lower the partial pressure of
oxygen, the fewer oxygen molecules are bound to heme. As a result, the partial pressure of oxygen plays a major
role in determining the degree of binding of oxygen to heme at the site of the respiratory membrane, as well as the
degree of dissociation of oxygen from heme at the site of body tissues.
22.5 • Transport of Gases
977
FIGURE 22.26
Oxygen-Hemoglobin Dissociation and Effects of pH and Temperature
These three graphs show (a) the relationship
between the partial pressure of oxygen and hemoglobin saturation, (b) the effect of pH on the oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve, and
(c) the effect of temperature on the oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve.
The mechanisms behind the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve also serve as automatic control
mechanisms that regulate how much oxygen is delivered to different tissues throughout the body. This is important
because some tissues have a higher metabolic rate than others. Highly active tissues, such as muscle, rapidly use
oxygen to produce ATP, lowering the partial pressure of oxygen in the tissue to about 20 mm Hg. The partial
pressure of oxygen inside capillaries is about 100 mm Hg, so the difference between the two becomes quite high,
about 80 mm Hg. As a result, a greater number of oxygen molecules dissociate from hemoglobin and enter the
tissues. The reverse is true of tissues, such as adipose (body fat), which have lower metabolic rates. Because less
oxygen is used by these cells, the partial pressure of oxygen within such tissues remains relatively high, resulting in
fewer oxygen molecules dissociating from hemoglobin and entering the tissue interstitial fluid. Although venous
blood is said to be deoxygenated, some oxygen is still bound to hemoglobin in its red blood cells. This provides an
oxygen reserve that can be used when tissues suddenly demand more oxygen.
Factors other than partial pressure also affect the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve. For example, a
higher temperature promotes hemoglobin and oxygen to dissociate faster, whereas a lower temperature inhibits
dissociation (see Figure 22.26, middle). However, the human body tightly regulates temperature, so this factor may
not affect gas exchange throughout the body. The exception to this is in highly active tissues, which may release a
larger amount of energy than is given off as heat. As a result, oxygen readily dissociates from hemoglobin, which is a
mechanism that helps to provide active tissues with more oxygen.
Certain hormones, such as androgens, epinephrine, thyroid hormones, and growth hormone, can affect the
oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/disassociation curve by stimulating the production of a compound called
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG) by erythrocytes. BPG is a byproduct of glycolysis. Because erythrocytes do not
contain mitochondria, glycolysis is the sole method by which these cells produce ATP. BPG promotes the
disassociation of oxygen from hemoglobin. Therefore, the greater the concentration of BPG, the more readily oxygen
dissociates from hemoglobin, despite its partial pressure.
The pH of the blood is another factor that influences the oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation curve (see
Figure 22.26). The Bohr effect is a phenomenon that arises from the relationship between pH and oxygen’s affinity
for hemoglobin: A lower, more acidic pH promotes oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin. In contrast, a higher, or
more basic, pH inhibits oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin. The greater the amount of carbon dioxide in the
blood, the more molecules that must be converted, which in turn generates hydrogen ions and thus lowers blood
pH. Furthermore, blood pH may become more acidic when certain byproducts of cell metabolism, such as lactic
acid, carbonic acid, and carbon dioxide, are released into the bloodstream.
Hemoglobin of the Fetus
The fetus has its own circulation with its own erythrocytes; however, it is dependent on the pregnant person for
978
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
oxygen. Blood is supplied to the fetus by way of the umbilical cord, which is connected to the placenta and
separated from maternal blood by the chorion. The mechanism of gas exchange at the chorion is similar to gas
exchange at the respiratory membrane. However, the partial pressure of oxygen is lower in the maternal blood in the
placenta, at about 35 to 50 mm Hg, than it is in maternal arterial blood. The difference in partial pressures between
maternal and fetal blood is not large, as the partial pressure of oxygen in fetal blood at the placenta is about 20 mm
Hg. Therefore, there is not as much diffusion of oxygen into the fetal blood supply. The fetus’ hemoglobin overcomes
this problem by having a greater affinity for oxygen than maternal hemoglobin (Figure 22.27). Both fetal and adult
hemoglobin have four subunits, but two of the subunits of fetal hemoglobin have a different structure that causes
fetal hemoglobin to have a greater affinity for oxygen than does adult hemoglobin.
FIGURE 22.27
Oxygen-Hemoglobin Dissociation Curves in Fetus and Adult
Fetal hemoglobin has a greater affinity for oxygen than
does adult hemoglobin.
Carbon Dioxide Transport in the Blood
Carbon dioxide is transported by three major mechanisms. The first mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is by
blood plasma, as some carbon dioxide molecules dissolve in the blood. The second mechanism is transport in the
form of bicarbonate (HCO3–), which also dissolves in plasma. The third mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is
similar to the transport of oxygen by erythrocytes (Figure 22.28).
FIGURE 22.28
Carbon Dioxide Transport
Carbon dioxide is transported by three different methods: (a) in erythrocytes; (b) after
forming carbonic acid (H2CO3 ), which is dissolved in plasma; (c) and in plasma.
22.5 • Transport of Gases
979
Dissolved Carbon Dioxide
Although carbon dioxide is not considered to be highly soluble in blood, a small fraction—about 7 to 10 percent—of
the carbon dioxide that diffuses into the blood from the tissues dissolves in plasma. The dissolved carbon dioxide
then travels in the bloodstream and when the blood reaches the pulmonary capillaries, the dissolved carbon dioxide
diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli, where it is then exhaled during pulmonary ventilation.
Bicarbonate Buffer
A large fraction—about 70 percent—of the carbon dioxide molecules that diffuse into the blood is transported to the
lungs as bicarbonate. Most bicarbonate is produced in erythrocytes after carbon dioxide diffuses into the capillaries,
and subsequently into red blood cells. Carbonic anhydrase (CA) causes carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic
acid (H2CO3), which dissociates into two ions: bicarbonate (HCO3–) and hydrogen (H+). The following formula
depicts this reaction:
Bicarbonate tends to build up in the erythrocytes, so that there is a greater concentration of bicarbonate in the
erythrocytes than in the surrounding blood plasma. As a result, some of the bicarbonate will leave the erythrocytes
and move down its concentration gradient into the plasma in exchange for chloride (Cl–) ions. This phenomenon is
referred to as the chloride shift and occurs because by exchanging one negative ion for another negative ion,
neither the electrical charge of the erythrocytes nor that of the blood is altered.
At the pulmonary capillaries, the chemical reaction that produced bicarbonate (shown above) is reversed, and
carbon dioxide and water are the products. Much of the bicarbonate in the plasma re-enters the erythrocytes in
exchange for chloride ions. Hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions join to form carbonic acid, which is converted into
carbon dioxide and water by carbonic anhydrase. Carbon dioxide diffuses out of the erythrocytes and into the
plasma, where it can further diffuse across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli to be exhaled during
pulmonary ventilation.
Carbaminohemoglobin
About 20 percent of carbon dioxide is bound by hemoglobin and is transported to the lungs. Carbon dioxide does not
bind to iron as oxygen does; instead, carbon dioxide binds amino acid moieties on the globin portions of hemoglobin
to form carbaminohemoglobin, which forms when hemoglobin and carbon dioxide bind. When hemoglobin is not
transporting oxygen, it tends to have a bluish-purple tone to it, creating the darker maroon color typical of
deoxygenated blood. The following formula depicts this reversible reaction:
Similar to the transport of oxygen by heme, the binding and dissociation of carbon dioxide to and from hemoglobin is
dependent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Because carbon dioxide is released from the lungs, blood that
leaves the lungs and reaches body tissues has a lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide than is found in the tissues.
As a result, carbon dioxide leaves the tissues because of its higher partial pressure, enters the blood, and then
moves into red blood cells, binding to hemoglobin. In contrast, in the pulmonary capillaries, the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide is high compared to within the alveoli. As a result, carbon dioxide dissociates readily from
hemoglobin and diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the air.
In addition to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin and the partial pressure of
oxygen in the blood also influence the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon dioxide. The Haldane effect is a
phenomenon that arises from the relationship between the partial pressure of oxygen and the affinity of hemoglobin
for carbon dioxide. Hemoglobin that is saturated with oxygen does not readily bind carbon dioxide. However, when
oxygen is not bound to heme and the partial pressure of oxygen is low, hemoglobin readily binds to carbon dioxide.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/oxyblood) to see the transport of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues. Why
is oxygenated blood bright red, whereas deoxygenated blood tends to be more of a purple color?
980
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
22.6 Modifications in Respiratory Functions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define the terms hyperpnea and hyperventilation
•
Describe the effect of exercise on the respiratory system
•
Describe the effect of high altitude on the respiratory system
•
Discuss the process of acclimatization
At rest, the respiratory system performs its functions at a constant, rhythmic pace, as regulated by the respiratory
centers of the brain. At this pace, ventilation provides sufficient oxygen to all the tissues of the body. However, there
are times that the respiratory system must alter the pace of its functions in order to accommodate the oxygen
demands of the body.
Hyperpnea
Hyperpnea is an increased depth and rate of ventilation to meet an increase in oxygen demand as might be seen in
exercise or disease, particularly diseases that target the respiratory or digestive tracts. This does not significantly
alter blood oxygen or carbon dioxide levels, but merely increases the depth and rate of ventilation to meet the
demand of the cells. In contrast, hyperventilation is an increased ventilation rate that is independent of the cellular
oxygen needs and leads to abnormally low blood carbon dioxide levels and high (alkaline) blood pH.
Interestingly, exercise does not cause hyperpnea as one might think. Muscles that perform work during exercise do
increase their demand for oxygen, stimulating an increase in ventilation. However, hyperpnea during exercise
appears to occur before a drop in oxygen levels within the muscles can occur. Therefore, hyperpnea must be driven
by other mechanisms, either instead of or in addition to a drop in oxygen levels. The exact mechanisms behind
exercise hyperpnea are not well understood, and some hypotheses are somewhat controversial. However, in
addition to low oxygen, high carbon dioxide, and low pH levels, there appears to be a complex interplay of factors
related to the nervous system and the respiratory centers of the brain.
First, a conscious decision to partake in exercise, or another form of physical exertion, results in a psychological
stimulus that may trigger the respiratory centers of the brain to increase ventilation. In addition, the respiratory
centers of the brain may be stimulated through the activation of motor neurons that innervate muscle groups that
are involved in the physical activity. Finally, physical exertion stimulates proprioceptors, which are receptors located
within the muscles, joints, and tendons, which sense movement and stretching; proprioceptors thus create a
stimulus that may also trigger the respiratory centers of the brain. These neural factors are consistent with the
sudden increase in ventilation that is observed immediately as exercise begins. Because the respiratory centers are
stimulated by psychological, motor neuron, and proprioceptor inputs throughout exercise, the fact that there is also
a sudden decrease in ventilation immediately after the exercise ends when these neural stimuli cease, further
supports the idea that they are involved in triggering the changes of ventilation.
High Altitude Effects
An increase in altitude results in a decrease in atmospheric pressure. Although the proportion of oxygen relative to
gases in the atmosphere remains at 21 percent, its partial pressure decreases (Table 22.4). As a result, it is more
difficult for a body to achieve the same level of oxygen saturation at high altitude than at low altitude, due to lower
atmospheric pressure. In fact, hemoglobin saturation is lower at high altitudes compared to hemoglobin saturation
at sea level. For example, hemoglobin saturation is about 67 percent at 19,000 feet above sea level, whereas it
reaches about 98 percent at sea level.
22.6 • Modifications in Respiratory Functions
981
Partial Pressure of Oxygen at Different Altitudes
Example location
Altitude (feet above
sea level)
Atmospheric pressure
(mm Hg)
Partial pressure of oxygen
(mm Hg)
New York City, New
York
0
760
159
Boulder, Colorado
5000
632
133
Aspen, Colorado
8000
565
118
Pike’s Peak, Colorado
14,000
447
94
Denali (Mt. McKinley),
Alaska
20,000
350
73
Mt. Everest, Tibet
29,000
260
54
TABLE 22.4
As you recall, partial pressure is extremely important in determining how much gas can cross the respiratory
membrane and enter the blood of the pulmonary capillaries. A lower partial pressure of oxygen means that there is a
smaller difference in partial pressures between the alveoli and the blood, so less oxygen crosses the respiratory
membrane. As a result, fewer oxygen molecules are bound by hemoglobin. Despite this, the tissues of the body still
receive a sufficient amount of oxygen during rest at high altitudes. This is due to two major mechanisms. First, the
number of oxygen molecules that enter the tissue from the blood is nearly equal between sea level and high
altitudes. At sea level, hemoglobin saturation is higher, but only a quarter of the oxygen molecules are actually
released into the tissue. At high altitudes, a greater proportion of molecules of oxygen are released into the tissues.
Secondly, at high altitudes, a greater amount of BPG is produced by erythrocytes, which enhances the dissociation
of oxygen from hemoglobin. Physical exertion, such as skiing or hiking, can lead to altitude sickness due to the low
amount of oxygen reserves in the blood at high altitudes. At sea level, there is a large amount of oxygen reserve in
venous blood (even though venous blood is thought of as “deoxygenated”) from which the muscles can draw during
physical exertion. Because the oxygen saturation is much lower at higher altitudes, this venous reserve is small,
resulting in pathological symptoms of low blood oxygen levels. You may have heard that it is important to drink more
water when traveling at higher altitudes than you are accustomed to. This is because your body will increase
micturition (urination) at high altitudes to counteract the effects of lower oxygen levels. By removing fluids, blood
plasma levels drop but not the total number of erythrocytes. In this way, the overall concentration of erythrocytes in
the blood increases, which helps tissues obtain the oxygen they need.
Acute mountain sickness (AMS), or altitude sickness, is a condition that results from acute exposure to high
altitudes due to a low partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes. AMS typically can occur at 2400 meters (8000
feet) above sea level. AMS is a result of low blood oxygen levels, as the body has acute difficulty adjusting to the low
partial pressure of oxygen. In serious cases, AMS can cause pulmonary or cerebral edema. Symptoms of AMS
include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, lightheadedness, drowsiness, feeling disoriented, increased pulse, and
nosebleeds. The only treatment for AMS is descending to a lower altitude; however, pharmacologic treatments and
supplemental oxygen can improve symptoms. AMS can be prevented by slowly ascending to the desired altitude,
allowing the body to acclimate, as well as maintaining proper hydration.
Acclimatization
Especially in situations where the ascent occurs too quickly, traveling to areas of high altitude can cause AMS.
Acclimatization is the process of adjustment that the respiratory system makes due to chronic exposure to a high
altitude. Over a period of time, the body adjusts to accommodate the lower partial pressure of oxygen. The low
partial pressure of oxygen at high altitudes results in a lower oxygen saturation level of hemoglobin in the blood. In
982
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
turn, the tissue levels of oxygen are also lower. As a result, the kidneys are stimulated to produce the hormone
erythropoietin (EPO), which stimulates the production of erythrocytes, resulting in a greater number of circulating
erythrocytes in an individual at a high altitude over a long period. With more red blood cells, there is more
hemoglobin to help transport the available oxygen. Even though there is low saturation of each hemoglobin
molecule, there will be more hemoglobin present, and therefore more oxygen in the blood. Over time, this allows the
person to partake in physical exertion without developing AMS.
22.7 Embryonic Development of the Respiratory System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Create a timeline of the phases of respiratory development in the fetus
•
Propose reasons for fetal breathing movements
•
Explain how the lungs become inflated after birth
Development of the respiratory system begins early in the fetus. It is a complex process that includes many
structures, most of which arise from the endoderm. Towards the end of development, the fetus can be observed
making breathing movements. Until birth, however, the pregnant person provides all of the oxygen to the fetus as
well as removes all of the fetal carbon dioxide via the placenta.
Time Line
The development of the respiratory system begins at about week 4 of gestation. By week 28, enough alveoli have
matured that a baby born prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own. The respiratory system, however,
is not fully developed until early childhood, when a full complement of mature alveoli is present.
Weeks 4–7
Respiratory development in the embryo begins around week 4. Ectodermal tissue from the anterior head region
invaginates posteriorly to form olfactory pits, which fuse with endodermal tissue of the developing pharynx. An
olfactory pit is one of a pair of structures that will enlarge to become the nasal cavity. At about this same time, the
lung bud forms. The lung bud is a dome-shaped structure composed of tissue that bulges from the foregut. The
foregut is endoderm just inferior to the pharyngeal pouches. The laryngotracheal bud is a structure that forms from
the longitudinal extension of the lung bud as development progresses. The portion of this structure nearest the
pharynx becomes the trachea, whereas the distal end becomes more bulbous, forming bronchial buds. A bronchial
bud is one of a pair of structures that will eventually become the bronchi and all other lower respiratory structures
(Figure 22.29).
22.7 • Embryonic Development of the Respiratory System
983
FIGURE 22.29
Development of the Lower Respiratory System
Weeks 7–16
Bronchial buds continue to branch as development progresses until all of the segmental bronchi have been formed.
Beginning around week 13, the lumens of the bronchi begin to expand in diameter. By week 16, respiratory
bronchioles form. The fetus now has all major lung structures involved in the airway.
Weeks 16–24
Once the respiratory bronchioles form, further development includes extensive vascularization, or the development
of the blood vessels, as well as the formation of alveolar ducts and alveolar precursors. At about week 19, the
respiratory bronchioles have formed. In addition, cells lining the respiratory structures begin to differentiate to form
type I and type II pneumocytes. Once type II cells have differentiated, they begin to secrete small amounts of
pulmonary surfactant. Around week 20, fetal breathing movements may begin.
Weeks 24–Term
Major growth and maturation of the respiratory system occurs from week 24 until term. More alveolar precursors
develop, and larger amounts of pulmonary surfactant are produced. Surfactant levels are not generally adequate to
create effective lung compliance until about the eighth month of pregnancy. The respiratory system continues to
expand, and the surfaces that will form the respiratory membrane develop further. At this point, pulmonary
capillaries have formed and continue to expand, creating a large surface area for gas exchange. The major milestone
of respiratory development occurs at around week 28, when sufficient alveolar precursors have matured so that a
baby born prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own. However, alveoli continue to develop and mature
into childhood. A full complement of functional alveoli does not appear until around 8 years of age.
Fetal “Breathing”
Although the function of fetal breathing movements is not entirely clear, they can be observed starting at 20–21
weeks of development. Fetal breathing movements involve muscle contractions that cause the inhalation of
amniotic fluid and exhalation of the same fluid, with pulmonary surfactant and mucus. Fetal breathing movements
are not continuous and may include periods of frequent movements and periods of no movements. Maternal factors
can influence the frequency of breathing movements. For example, high blood glucose levels, called hyperglycemia,
can boost the number of breathing movements. Conversely, low blood glucose levels, called hypoglycemia, can
reduce the number of fetal breathing movements. Tobacco use is also known to lower fetal breathing rates. Fetal
breathing may help tone the muscles in preparation for breathing movements once the fetus is born. It may also
help the alveoli to form and mature. Fetal breathing movements are considered a sign of robust health.
984
22 • The Respiratory System
Access for free at openstax.org
Birth
Prior to birth, the lungs are filled with amniotic fluid, mucus, and surfactant. As the fetus is squeezed through the
birth canal, the fetal thoracic cavity is compressed, expelling much of this fluid. Some fluid remains, however, but is
rapidly absorbed by the body shortly after birth. The first inhalation occurs within 10 seconds after birth and not
only serves as the first inspiration, but also acts to inflate the lungs. Pulmonary surfactant is critical for inflation to
occur, as it reduces the surface tension of the alveoli. Preterm birth around 26 weeks frequently results in severe
respiratory distress, although with current medical advancements, some babies may survive. Prior to 26 weeks,
sufficient pulmonary surfactant is not produced, and the surfaces for gas exchange have not formed adequately;
therefore, survival is low.
Disorders of the...
Respiratory System: Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) primarily occurs in infants born prematurely. Up to 50 percent of infants
born between 26 and 28 weeks and fewer than 30 percent of infants born between 30 and 31 weeks develop
RDS. RDS results from insufficient production of pulmonary surfactant, thereby preventing the lungs from
properly inflating at birth. A small amount of pulmonary surfactant is produced beginning at around 20 weeks;
however, this is not sufficient for inflation of the lungs. As a result, dyspnea occurs and gas exchange cannot be
performed properly. Blood oxygen levels are low, whereas blood carbon dioxide levels and pH are high.
The primary cause of RDS is premature birth, which may be due to a variety of known or unknown causes. Other
risk factors include gestational diabetes, cesarean delivery, second-born twins, and family history of RDS. The
presence of RDS can lead to other serious disorders, such as septicemia (infection of the blood) or pulmonary
hemorrhage. Therefore, it is important that RDS is immediately recognized and treated to prevent death and
reduce the risk of developing other disorders.
Medical advances have resulted in an improved ability to treat RDS and support the infant until proper lung
development can occur. At the time of delivery, treatment may include resuscitation and intubation if the infant
does not breathe on their own. These infants would need to be placed on a ventilator to mechanically assist with
the breathing process. If spontaneous breathing occurs, application of nasal continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) may be required. In addition, pulmonary surfactant is typically administered. Death due to RDS
has been reduced by 50 percent due to the introduction of pulmonary surfactant therapy. Other therapies may
include corticosteroids, supplemental oxygen, and assisted ventilation. Supportive therapies, such as
temperature regulation, nutritional support, and antibiotics, may be administered to the premature infant as
well.
22.7 • Embryonic Development of the Respiratory System
985
Key Terms
acclimatization
process of adjustment that the
respiratory system makes due to chronic exposure
to high altitudes
acute mountain sickness (AMS)
condition that
occurs a result of acute exposure to high altitude
due to a low partial pressure of oxygen
ala
(plural = alae) small, flaring structure of a nostril
that forms the lateral side of the nares
alar cartilage
cartilage that supports the apex of the
nose and helps shape the nares; it is connected to
the septal cartilage and connective tissue of the
alae
alveolar dead space
air space within alveoli that are
unable to participate in gas exchange
alveolar duct
small tube that leads from the terminal
bronchiole to the respiratory bronchiole and is the
point of attachment for alveoli
alveolar macrophage
immune system cell of the
alveolus that removes debris and pathogens
alveolar pore
opening that allows airflow between
neighboring alveoli
alveolar sac
cluster of alveoli
alveolus
small, grape-like sac that performs gas
exchange in the lungs
anatomical dead space
air space present in the
airway that never reaches the alveoli and therefore
never participates in gas exchange
apex
tip of the external nose
apneustic center
network of neurons within the pons
that stimulate the neurons in the dorsal respiratory
group; controls the depth of inspiration
atmospheric pressure
amount of force that is
exerted by gases in the air surrounding any given
surface
Bohr effect
relationship between blood pH and
oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin
Boyle’s law
relationship between volume and
pressure as described by the formula: P1V1 = P2V2
bridge
portion of the external nose that lies in the
area of the nasal bones
bronchial bud
structure in the developing embryo
that forms when the laryngotracheal bud extends
and branches to form two bulbous structures
bronchial tree
collective name for the multiple
branches of the bronchi and bronchioles of the
respiratory system
bronchiole
branch of bronchi that are 1 mm or less in
diameter and terminate at alveolar sacs
bronchoconstriction
decrease in the size of the
bronchiole due to relaxation of the muscular wall
bronchodilation
increase in the size of the bronchiole
due to contraction of the muscular wall
bronchus
tube connected to the trachea that
branches into many subsidiaries and provides a
passageway for air to enter and leave the lungs
carbaminohemoglobin
bound form of hemoglobin
and carbon dioxide
carbonic anhydrase (CA)
enzyme that catalyzes the
reaction that causes carbon dioxide and water to
form carbonic acid
cardiac notch
indentation on the surface of the left
lung that allows space for the heart
central chemoreceptor
one of the specialized
receptors that are located in the brain that sense
changes in hydrogen ion, oxygen, or carbon dioxide
concentrations in the brain
chloride shift
facilitated diffusion that exchanges
bicarbonate (HCO3–) with chloride (Cl–) ions
conducting zone
region of the respiratory system
that includes the organs and structures that provide
passageways for air and are not directly involved in
gas exchange
cricoid cartilage
portion of the larynx composed of a
ring of cartilage with a wide posterior region and a
thinner anterior region; attached to the esophagus
Dalton’s law
statement of the principle that a specific
gas type in a mixture exerts its own pressure, as if
that specific gas type was not part of a mixture of
gases
dorsal respiratory group (DRG)
region of the medulla
oblongata that stimulates the contraction of the
diaphragm and intercostal muscles to induce
inspiration
dorsum nasi
intermediate portion of the external
nose that connects the bridge to the apex and is
supported by the nasal bone
epiglottis
leaf-shaped piece of elastic cartilage that is
a portion of the larynx that swings to close the
trachea during swallowing
expiration
(also, exhalation) process that causes the
air to leave the lungs
expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
amount of air that
can be forcefully exhaled after a normal tidal
exhalation
external nose
region of the nose that is easily visible
to others
external respiration
gas exchange that occurs in the
alveoli
fauces
portion of the posterior oral cavity that
connects the oral cavity to the oropharynx
fibroelastic membrane
specialized membrane that
connects the ends of the C-shape cartilage in the
trachea; contains smooth muscle fibers
forced breathing
(also, hyperpnea) mode of
986
22 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
breathing that occurs during exercise or by active
thought that requires muscle contraction for both
inspiration and expiration
foregut
endoderm of the embryo towards the head
region
functional residual capacity (FRC)
sum of ERV and
RV, which is the amount of air that remains in the
lungs after a tidal expiration
glottis
opening between the vocal folds through
which air passes when producing speech
Haldane effect
relationship between the partial
pressure of oxygen and the affinity of hemoglobin
for carbon dioxide
Henry’s law
statement of the principle that the
concentration of gas in a liquid is directly
proportional to the solubility and partial pressure of
that gas
hilum
concave structure on the mediastinal surface
of the lungs where blood vessels, lymphatic vessels,
nerves, and a bronchus enter the lung
hyperpnea
increased rate and depth of ventilation
due to an increase in oxygen demand that does not
significantly alter blood oxygen or carbon dioxide
levels
hyperventilation
increased ventilation rate that leads
to abnormally low blood carbon dioxide levels and
high (alkaline) blood pH
inspiration
(also, inhalation) process that causes air
to enter the lungs
inspiratory capacity (IC)
sum of the TV and IRV,
which is the amount of air that can maximally be
inhaled past a tidal expiration
inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)
amount of air that
enters the lungs due to deep inhalation past the
tidal volume
internal respiration
gas exchange that occurs at the
level of body tissues
intra-alveolar pressure
(intrapulmonary pressure)
pressure of the air within the alveoli
intrapleural pressure
pressure of the air within the
pleural cavity
laryngeal prominence
region where the two lamine
of the thyroid cartilage join, forming a protrusion
known as “Adam’s apple”
laryngopharynx
portion of the pharynx bordered by
the oropharynx superiorly and esophagus and
trachea inferiorly; serves as a route for both air and
food
laryngotracheal
bud forms from the lung bud, has a
tracheal end and bulbous bronchial buds at the
distal end
larynx
cartilaginous structure that produces the
voice, prevents food and beverages from entering
the trachea, and regulates the volume of air that
enters and leaves the lungs
lingual tonsil
lymphoid tissue located at the base of
the tongue
lung
organ of the respiratory system that performs
gas exchange
lung bud
median dome that forms from the
endoderm of the foregut
meatus
one of three recesses (superior, middle, and
inferior) in the nasal cavity attached to the conchae
that increase the surface area of the nasal cavity
naris
(plural = nares) opening of the nostrils
nasal bone
bone of the skull that lies under the root
and bridge of the nose and is connected to the
frontal and maxillary bones
nasal septum
wall composed of bone and cartilage
that separates the left and right nasal cavities
nasopharynx
portion of the pharynx flanked by the
conchae and oropharynx that serves as an airway
olfactory pit
invaginated ectodermal tissue in the
anterior portion of the head region of an embryo
that will form the nasal cavity
oropharynx
portion of the pharynx flanked by the
nasopharynx, oral cavity, and laryngopharynx that is
a passageway for both air and food
oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve
graph that
describes the relationship of partial pressure to the
binding and disassociation of oxygen to and from
heme
oxyhemoglobin
(Hb–O2) bound form of hemoglobin
and oxygen
palatine tonsil
one of the paired structures
composed of lymphoid tissue located anterior to the
uvula at the roof of isthmus of the fauces
paranasal sinus
one of the cavities within the skull
that is connected to the conchae that serve to warm
and humidify incoming air, produce mucus, and
lighten the weight of the skull; consists of frontal,
maxillary, sphenoidal, and ethmoidal sinuses
parietal pleura
outermost layer of the pleura that
connects to the thoracic wall, mediastinum, and
diaphragm
partial pressure
force exerted by each gas in a
mixture of gases
peripheral chemoreceptor
one of the specialized
receptors located in the aortic arch and carotid
arteries that sense changes in pH, carbon dioxide, or
oxygen blood levels
pharyngeal tonsil
structure composed of lymphoid
tissue located in the nasopharynx
pharynx
region of the conducting zone that forms a
tube of skeletal muscle lined with respiratory
epithelium; located between the nasal conchae and
22 • Key Terms
987
the esophagus and trachea
philtrum
concave surface of the face that connects
the apex of the nose to the top lip
pleural cavity
space between the visceral and
parietal pleurae
pleural fluid
substance that acts as a lubricant for
the visceral and parietal layers of the pleura during
the movement of breathing
pneumotaxic center
network of neurons within the
pons that inhibit the activity of the neurons in the
dorsal respiratory group; controls rate of breathing
pulmonary artery
artery that arises from the
pulmonary trunk and carries deoxygenated, arterial
blood to the alveoli
pulmonary plexus
network of autonomic nervous
system fibers found near the hilum of the lung
pulmonary surfactant
substance composed of
phospholipids and proteins that reduces the surface
tension of the alveoli; made by type II alveolar cells
pulmonary ventilation
exchange of gases between
the lungs and the atmosphere; breathing
quiet breathing
(also, eupnea) mode of breathing
that occurs at rest and does not require the
cognitive thought of the individual
residual volume (RV)
amount of air that remains in
the lungs after maximum exhalation
respiratory bronchiole
specific type of bronchiole
that leads to alveolar sacs
respiratory cycle
one sequence of inspiration and
expiration
respiratory epithelium
ciliated lining of much of the
conducting zone that is specialized to remove debris
and pathogens, and produce mucus
respiratory membrane
alveolar and capillary wall
together, which form an air-blood barrier that
facilitates the simple diffusion of gases
respiratory rate
total number of breaths taken each
minute
respiratory volume
varying amounts of air within the
lung at a given time
respiratory zone
includes structures of the
respiratory system that are directly involved in gas
exchange
root
region of the external nose between the
eyebrows
thoracic wall compliance
ability of the thoracic wall
to stretch while under pressure
thyroid cartilage
largest piece of cartilage that
makes up the larynx and consists of two lamine
tidal volume (TV)
amount of air that normally enters
the lungs during quiet breathing
total dead space
sum of the anatomical dead space
and alveolar dead space
total lung capacity (TLC)
total amount of air that can
be held in the lungs; sum of TV, ERV, IRV, and RV
total pressure
sum of all the partial pressures of a
gaseous mixture
trachea
tube composed of cartilaginous rings and
supporting tissue that connects the lung bronchi
and the larynx; provides a route for air to enter and
exit the lung
trachealis muscle
smooth muscle located in the
fibroelastic membrane of the trachea
transpulmonary pressure
pressure difference
between the intrapleural and intra-alveolar
pressures
true vocal cord
one of the pair of folded, white
membranes that have a free inner edge that
oscillates as air passes through to produce sound
type I alveolar cell
squamous epithelial cells that are
the major cell type in the alveolar wall; highly
permeable to gases
type II alveolar cell
cuboidal epithelial cells that are
the minor cell type in the alveolar wall; secrete
pulmonary surfactant
ventilation
movement of air into and out of the lungs;
consists of inspiration and expiration
ventral respiratory group (VRG)
region of the
medulla oblongata that stimulates the contraction
of the accessory muscles involved in respiration to
induce forced inspiration and expiration
vestibular fold
part of the folded region of the glottis
composed of mucous membrane; supports the
epiglottis during swallowing
visceral pleura
innermost layer of the pleura that is
superficial to the lungs and extends into the lung
fissures
vital capacity (VC)
sum of TV, ERV, and IRV, which is
all the volumes that participate in gas exchange
Chapter Review
22.1 Organs and Structures of the
Respiratory System
The respiratory system is responsible for obtaining
oxygen and getting rid of carbon dioxide, and aiding in
speech production and in sensing odors. From a
functional perspective, the respiratory system can be
divided into two major areas: the conducting zone and
the respiratory zone. The conducting zone consists of
all of the structures that provide passageways for air to
travel into and out of the lungs: the nasal cavity,
pharynx, trachea, bronchi, and most bronchioles. The
nasal passages contain the conchae and meatuses that
988
22 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
expand the surface area of the cavity, which helps to
warm and humidify incoming air, while removing debris
and pathogens. The pharynx is composed of three
major sections: the nasopharynx, which is continuous
with the nasal cavity; the oropharynx, which borders
the nasopharynx and the oral cavity; and the
laryngopharynx, which borders the oropharynx,
trachea, and esophagus. The respiratory zone includes
the structures of the lung that are directly involved in
gas exchange: the terminal bronchioles and alveoli.
The lining of the conducting zone is composed mostly
of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with
goblet cells. The mucus traps pathogens and debris,
whereas beating cilia move the mucus superiorly
toward the throat, where it is swallowed. As the
bronchioles become smaller and smaller, and nearer
the alveoli, the epithelium thins and is simple
squamous epithelium in the alveoli. The endothelium
of the surrounding capillaries, together with the
alveolar epithelium, forms the respiratory membrane.
This is a blood-air barrier through which gas exchange
occurs by simple diffusion.
22.2 The Lungs
The lungs are the major organs of the respiratory
system and are responsible for performing gas
exchange. The lungs are paired and separated into
lobes; The left lung consists of two lobes, whereas the
right lung consists of three lobes. Blood circulation is
very important, as blood is required to transport
oxygen from the lungs to other tissues throughout the
body. The function of the pulmonary circulation is to
aid in gas exchange. The pulmonary artery provides
deoxygenated blood to the capillaries that form
respiratory membranes with the alveoli, and the
pulmonary veins return newly oxygenated blood to the
heart for further transport throughout the body. The
lungs are innervated by the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous systems, which coordinate the
bronchodilation and bronchoconstriction of the
airways. The lungs are enclosed by the pleura, a
membrane that is composed of visceral and parietal
pleural layers. The space between these two layers is
called the pleural cavity. The mesothelial cells of the
pleural membrane create pleural fluid, which serves as
both a lubricant (to reduce friction during breathing)
and as an adhesive to adhere the lungs to the thoracic
wall (to facilitate movement of the lungs during
ventilation).
22.3 The Process of Breathing
Pulmonary ventilation is the process of breathing,
which is driven by pressure differences between the
lungs and the atmosphere. Atmospheric pressure is the
force exerted by gases present in the atmosphere. The
force exerted by gases within the alveoli is called intra-
alveolar (intrapulmonary) pressure, whereas the force
exerted by gases in the pleural cavity is called
intrapleural pressure. Typically, intrapleural pressure is
lower, or negative to, intra-alveolar pressure. The
difference in pressure between intrapleural and intra-
alveolar pressures is called transpulmonary pressure.
In addition, intra-alveolar pressure will equalize with
the atmospheric pressure. Pressure is determined by
the volume of the space occupied by a gas and is
influenced by resistance. Air flows when a pressure
gradient is created, from a space of higher pressure to
a space of lower pressure. Boyle’s law describes the
relationship between volume and pressure. A gas is at
lower pressure in a larger volume because the gas
molecules have more space to in which to move. The
same quantity of gas in a smaller volume results in gas
molecules crowding together, producing increased
pressure.
Resistance is created by inelastic surfaces, as well as
the diameter of the airways. Resistance reduces the
flow of gases. The surface tension of the alveoli also
influences pressure, as it opposes the expansion of the
alveoli. However, pulmonary surfactant helps to reduce
the surface tension so that the alveoli do not collapse
during expiration. The ability of the lungs to stretch,
called lung compliance, also plays a role in gas flow.
The more the lungs can stretch, the greater the
potential volume of the lungs. The greater the volume
of the lungs, the lower the air pressure within the
lungs.
Pulmonary ventilation consists of the process of
inspiration (or inhalation), where air enters the lungs,
and expiration (or exhalation), where air leaves the
lungs. During inspiration, the diaphragm and external
intercostal muscles contract, causing the rib cage to
expand and move outward, and expanding the thoracic
cavity and lung volume. This creates a lower pressure
within the lung than that of the atmosphere, causing air
to be drawn into the lungs. During expiration, the
diaphragm and intercostals relax, causing the thorax
and lungs to recoil. The air pressure within the lungs
increases to above the pressure of the atmosphere,
causing air to be forced out of the lungs. However,
during forced exhalation, the internal intercostals and
abdominal muscles may be involved in forcing air out of
the lungs.
Respiratory volume describes the amount of air in a
given space within the lungs, or which can be moved by
the lung, and is dependent on a variety of factors. Tidal
22 • Chapter Review
989
volume refers to the amount of air that enters the lungs
during quiet breathing, whereas inspiratory reserve
volume is the amount of air that enters the lungs when
a person inhales past the tidal volume. Expiratory
reserve volume is the extra amount of air that can leave
with forceful expiration, following tidal expiration.
Residual volume is the amount of air that is left in the
lungs after expelling the expiratory reserve volume.
Respiratory capacity is the combination of two or more
volumes. Anatomical dead space refers to the air
within the respiratory structures that never participates
in gas exchange, because it does not reach functional
alveoli. Respiratory rate is the number of breaths taken
per minute, which may change during certain diseases
or conditions.
Both respiratory rate and depth are controlled by the
respiratory centers of the brain, which are stimulated
by factors such as chemical and pH changes in the
blood. These changes are sensed by central
chemoreceptors, which are located in the brain, and
peripheral chemoreceptors, which are located in the
aortic arch and carotid arteries. A rise in carbon dioxide
or a decline in oxygen levels in the blood stimulates an
increase in respiratory rate and depth.
22.4 Gas Exchange
The behavior of gases can be explained by the
principles of Dalton’s law and Henry’s law, both of
which describe aspects of gas exchange. Dalton’s law
states that each specific gas in a mixture of gases
exerts force (its partial pressure) independently of the
other gases in the mixture. Henry’s law states that the
amount of a specific gas that dissolves in a liquid is a
function of its partial pressure. The greater the partial
pressure of a gas, the more of that gas will dissolve in a
liquid, as the gas moves toward equilibrium. Gas
molecules move down a pressure gradient; in other
words, gas moves from a region of high pressure to a
region of low pressure. The partial pressure of oxygen
is high in the alveoli and low in the blood of the
pulmonary capillaries. As a result, oxygen diffuses
across the respiratory membrane from the alveoli into
the blood. In contrast, the partial pressure of carbon
dioxide is high in the pulmonary capillaries and low in
the alveoli. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses across
the respiratory membrane from the blood into the
alveoli. The amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide that
diffuses across the respiratory membrane is similar.
Ventilation is the process that moves air into and out of
the alveoli, and perfusion affects the flow of blood in
the capillaries. Both are important in gas exchange, as
ventilation must be sufficient to create a high partial
pressure of oxygen in the alveoli. If ventilation is
insufficient and the partial pressure of oxygen drops in
the alveolar air, the capillary is constricted and blood
flow is redirected to alveoli with sufficient ventilation.
External respiration refers to gas exchange that occurs
in the alveoli, whereas internal respiration refers to gas
exchange that occurs in the tissue. Both are driven by
partial pressure differences.
22.5 Transport of Gases
Oxygen is primarily transported through the blood by
erythrocytes. These cells contain a metalloprotein
called hemoglobin, which is composed of four subunits
with a ring-like structure. Each subunit contains one
atom of iron bound to a molecule of heme. Heme binds
oxygen so that each hemoglobin molecule can bind up
to four oxygen molecules. When all of the heme units in
the blood are bound to oxygen, hemoglobin is
considered to be saturated. Hemoglobin is partially
saturated when only some heme units are bound to
oxygen. An oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation
curve is a common way to depict the relationship of
how easily oxygen binds to or dissociates from
hemoglobin as a function of the partial pressure of
oxygen. As the partial pressure of oxygen increases,
the more readily hemoglobin binds to oxygen. At the
same time, once one molecule of oxygen is bound by
hemoglobin, additional oxygen molecules more readily
bind to hemoglobin. Other factors such as
temperature, pH, the partial pressure of carbon
dioxide, and the concentration of
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate can enhance or inhibit the
binding of hemoglobin and oxygen as well. Fetal
hemoglobin has a different structure than adult
hemoglobin, which results in fetal hemoglobin having a
greater affinity for oxygen than adult hemoglobin.
Carbon dioxide is transported in blood by three
different mechanisms: as dissolved carbon dioxide, as
bicarbonate, or as carbaminohemoglobin. A small
portion of carbon dioxide remains. The largest amount
of transported carbon dioxide is as bicarbonate,
formed in erythrocytes. For this conversion, carbon
dioxide is combined with water with the aid of an
enzyme called carbonic anhydrase. This combination
forms carbonic acid, which spontaneously dissociates
into bicarbonate and hydrogen ions. As bicarbonate
builds up in erythrocytes, it is moved across the
membrane into the plasma in exchange for chloride
ions by a mechanism called the chloride shift. At the
pulmonary capillaries, bicarbonate re-enters
erythrocytes in exchange for chloride ions, and the
reaction with carbonic anhydrase is reversed,
recreating carbon dioxide and water. Carbon dioxide
990
22 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
then diffuses out of the erythrocyte and across the
respiratory membrane into the air. An intermediate
amount of carbon dioxide binds directly to hemoglobin
to form carbaminohemoglobin. The partial pressures of
carbon dioxide and oxygen, as well as the oxygen
saturation of hemoglobin, influence how readily
hemoglobin binds carbon dioxide. The less saturated
hemoglobin is and the lower the partial pressure of
oxygen in the blood is, the more readily hemoglobin
binds to carbon dioxide. This is an example of the
Haldane effect.
22.6 Modifications in Respiratory Functions
Normally, the respiratory centers of the brain maintain
a consistent, rhythmic breathing cycle. However, in
certain cases, the respiratory system must adjust to
situational changes in order to supply the body with
sufficient oxygen. For example, exercise results in
increased ventilation, and chronic exposure to a high
altitude results in a greater number of circulating
erythrocytes. Hyperpnea, an increase in the rate and
depth of ventilation, appears to be a function of three
neural mechanisms that include a psychological
stimulus, motor neuron activation of skeletal muscles,
and the activation of proprioceptors in the muscles,
joints, and tendons. As a result, hyperpnea related to
exercise is initiated when exercise begins, as opposed
to when tissue oxygen demand actually increases.
In contrast, acute exposure to a high altitude,
particularly during times of physical exertion, does
result in low blood and tissue levels of oxygen. This
change is caused by a low partial pressure of oxygen in
the air, because the atmospheric pressure at high
altitudes is lower than the atmospheric pressure at sea
level. This can lead to a condition called acute
mountain sickness (AMS) with symptoms that include
headaches, disorientation, fatigue, nausea, and
lightheadedness. Over a long period of time, a person’s
body will adjust to the high altitude, a process called
acclimatization. During acclimatization, the low tissue
levels of oxygen will cause the kidneys to produce
greater amounts of the hormone erythropoietin, which
stimulates the production of erythrocytes. Increased
levels of circulating erythrocytes provide an increased
amount of hemoglobin that helps supply an individual
with more oxygen, preventing the symptoms of AMS.
22.7 Embryonic Development of the
Respiratory System
The development of the respiratory system in the fetus
begins at about 4 weeks and continues into childhood.
Ectodermal tissue in the anterior portion of the head
region invaginates posteriorly, forming olfactory pits,
which ultimately fuse with endodermal tissue of the
early pharynx. At about this same time, a protrusion of
endodermal tissue extends anteriorly from the foregut,
producing a lung bud, which continues to elongate until
it forms the laryngotracheal bud. The proximal portion
of this structure will mature into the trachea, whereas
the bulbous end will branch to form two bronchial
buds. These buds then branch repeatedly, so that at
about week 16, all major airway structures are present.
Development progresses after week 16 as respiratory
bronchioles and alveolar ducts form, and extensive
vascularization occurs. Alveolar type I cells also begin
to take shape. Type II pulmonary cells develop and
begin to produce small amounts of surfactant. As the
fetus grows, the respiratory system continues to
expand as more alveoli develop and more surfactant is
produced. Beginning at about week 36 and lasting into
childhood, alveolar precursors mature to become fully
functional alveoli. At birth, compression of the thoracic
cavity forces much of the fluid in the lungs to be
expelled. The first inhalation inflates the lungs. Fetal
breathing movements begin around week 20 or 21, and
occur when contractions of the respiratory muscles
cause the fetus to inhale and exhale amniotic fluid.
These movements continue until birth and may help to
tone the muscles in preparation for breathing after
birth and are a sign of good health.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/asthma) to
learn more about what happens during an asthma
attack. What are the three changes that occur
inside the airways during an asthma attack?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
spirometers) to learn more about lung volumes and
spirometers. Explain how spirometry test results
can be used to diagnose respiratory diseases or
determine the effectiveness of disease treatment.
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/oxyblood) to
see the transport of oxygen from the lungs to the
tissues. Why is oxygenated blood bright red,
whereas deoxygenated blood tends to be more of a
purple color?
22 • Interactive Link Questions
991
Review Questions
4. Which of the following anatomical structures is not
part of the conducting zone?
a.
pharynx
b.
nasal cavity
c.
alveoli
d.
bronchi
5. What is the function of the conchae in the nasal
cavity?
a.
increase surface area
b.
exchange gases
c.
maintain surface tension
d.
maintain air pressure
6. The fauces connects which of the following
structures to the oropharynx?
a.
nasopharynx
b.
laryngopharynx
c.
nasal cavity
d.
oral cavity
7. Which of the following are structural features of the
trachea?
a.
C-shaped cartilage
b.
smooth muscle fibers
c.
cilia
d.
all of the above
8. Which of the following structures is not part of the
bronchial tree?
a.
alveoli
b.
bronchi
c.
terminal bronchioles
d.
respiratory bronchioles
9. What is the role of alveolar macrophages?
a.
to secrete pulmonary surfactant
b.
to secrete antimicrobial proteins
c.
to remove pathogens and debris
d.
to facilitate gas exchange
10. Which of the following structures separates the
lung into lobes?
a.
mediastinum
b.
fissure
c.
root
d.
pleura
11. A section of the lung that receives its own tertiary
bronchus is called the ________.
a.
bronchopulmonary segment
b.
pulmonary lobule
c.
interpulmonary segment
d.
respiratory segment
12. The ________ circulation picks up oxygen for
cellular use and drops off carbon dioxide for
removal from the body.
a.
pulmonary
b.
interlobular
c.
respiratory
d.
bronchial
13. The pleura that surrounds the lungs consists of
two layers, the ________.
a.
visceral and parietal pleurae.
b.
mediastinum and parietal pleurae.
c.
visceral and mediastinum pleurae.
d.
none of the above
14. Which of the following processes does
atmospheric pressure play a role in?
a.
pulmonary ventilation
b.
production of pulmonary surfactant
c.
resistance
d.
surface tension
15. A decrease in volume leads to a(n) ________
pressure.
a.
decrease in
b.
equalization of
c.
increase in
d.
zero
16. The pressure difference between the intra-
alveolar and intrapleural pressures is called
________.
a.
atmospheric pressure
b.
pulmonary pressure
c.
negative pressure
d.
transpulmonary pressure
17. Gas flow decreases as ________ increases.
a.
resistance
b.
pressure
c.
airway diameter
d.
friction
18. Contraction of the external intercostal muscles
causes which of the following to occur?
a.
The diaphragm moves downward.
b.
The rib cage is compressed.
c.
The thoracic cavity volume decreases.
d.
The ribs and sternum move upward.
992
22 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
19. Which of the following prevents the alveoli from
collapsing?
a.
residual volume
b.
tidal volume
c.
expiratory reserve volume
d.
inspiratory reserve volume
20. Gas moves from an area of ________ partial
pressure to an area of ________ partial pressure.
a.
low; high
b.
low; low
c.
high; high
d.
high; low
21. When ventilation is not sufficient, which of the
following occurs?
a.
The capillary constricts.
b.
The capillary dilates.
c.
The partial pressure of oxygen in the affected
alveolus increases.
d.
The bronchioles dilate.
22. Gas exchange that occurs at the level of the
tissues is called ________.
a.
external respiration
b.
interpulmonary respiration
c.
internal respiration
d.
pulmonary ventilation
23. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is 45 mm
Hg in the blood and 40 mm Hg in the alveoli. What
happens to the carbon dioxide?
a.
It diffuses into the blood.
b.
It diffuses into the alveoli.
c.
The gradient is too small for carbon dioxide to
diffuse.
d.
It decomposes into carbon and oxygen.
24. Oxyhemoglobin forms by a chemical reaction
between which of the following?
a.
hemoglobin and carbon dioxide
b.
carbonic anhydrase and carbon dioxide
c.
hemoglobin and oxygen
d.
carbonic anhydrase and oxygen
25. Which of the following factors play a role in the
oxygen–hemoglobin saturation/dissociation
curve?
a.
temperature
b.
pH
c.
BPG
d.
all of the above
26. Which of the following occurs during the chloride
shift?
a.
Chloride is removed from the erythrocyte.
b.
Chloride is exchanged for bicarbonate.
c.
Bicarbonate is removed from the erythrocyte.
d.
Bicarbonate is removed from the blood.
27. A low partial pressure of oxygen promotes
hemoglobin binding to carbon dioxide. This is an
example of the ________.
a.
Haldane effect
b.
Bohr effect
c.
Dalton’s law
d.
Henry’s law
28. Increased ventilation that results in an increase in
blood pH is called ________.
a.
hyperventilation
b.
hyperpnea
c.
acclimatization
d.
apnea
29. Exercise can trigger symptoms of AMS due to
which of the following?
a.
low partial pressure of oxygen
b.
low atmospheric pressure
c.
abnormal neural signals
d.
small venous reserve of oxygen
30. Which of the following stimulates the production
of erythrocytes?
a.
AMS
b.
high blood levels of carbon dioxide
c.
low atmospheric pressure
d.
erythropoietin
31. The olfactory pits form from which of the
following?
a.
mesoderm
b.
cartilage
c.
ectoderm
d.
endoderm
32. A full complement of mature alveoli are present by
________.
a.
early childhood, around 8 years of age
b.
birth
c.
37 weeks
d.
16 weeks
22 • Review Questions
993
33. If a baby is born prematurely before type II cells
produce sufficient pulmonary surfactant, which of
the following might you expect?
a.
difficulty expressing fluid
b.
difficulty inflating the lungs
c.
difficulty with pulmonary capillary flow
d.
no difficulty as type I cells can provide
enough surfactant for normal breathing
34. When do fetal breathing movements begin?
a.
around week 20
b.
around week 37
c.
around week 16
d.
after birth
35. What happens to the fluid that remains in the
lungs after birth?
a.
It reduces the surface tension of the alveoli.
b.
It is expelled shortly after birth.
c.
It is absorbed shortly after birth.
d.
It lubricates the pleurae.
Critical Thinking Questions
36. Describe the three regions of the pharynx and
their functions.
37. If a person sustains an injury to the epiglottis,
what would be the physiological result?
38. Compare and contrast the conducting and
respiratory zones.
39. Compare and contrast the right and left lungs.
40. Why are the pleurae not damaged during normal
breathing?
41. Describe what is meant by the term “lung
compliance.”
42. Outline the steps involved in quiet breathing.
43. What is respiratory rate and how is it controlled?
44. Compare and contrast Dalton’s law and Henry’s
law.
45. A smoker develops damage to several alveoli that
then can no longer function. How does this affect
gas exchange?
46. Compare and contrast adult hemoglobin and fetal
hemoglobin.
47. Describe the relationship between the partial
pressure of oxygen and the binding of oxygen to
hemoglobin.
48. Describe three ways in which carbon dioxide can
be transported.
49. Describe the neural factors involved in increasing
ventilation during exercise.
50. What is the major mechanism that results in
acclimatization?
51. During what timeframe does a fetus have enough
mature structures to breathe on its own if born
prematurely? Describe the other structures that
develop during this phase.
52. Describe fetal breathing movements and their
purpose.
994
22 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 23
The Digestive System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
List and describe the functional anatomy of the organs and accessory organs of the digestive system
•
Discuss the processes and control of ingestion, propulsion, mechanical digestion, chemical digestion,
absorption, and defecation
•
Discuss the roles of the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder in digestion
•
Compare and contrast the digestion of the three macronutrients
The digestive system is continually at work, yet people seldom appreciate the complex tasks it
performs in a choreographed biologic symphony. Consider what happens when you eat an apple. Of course, you
enjoy the apple’s taste as you chew it, but in the hours that follow, unless something goes amiss and you get a
stomachache, you don’t notice that your digestive system is working. You may be taking a walk or studying or
sleeping, having forgotten all about the apple, but your stomach and intestines are busy digesting it and absorbing
its vitamins and other nutrients. By the time any waste material is excreted, the body has appropriated all it can use
from the apple. In short, whether you pay attention or not, the organs of the digestive system perform their specific
functions, allowing you to use the food you eat to keep you going. This chapter examines the structure and functions
of these organs, and explores the mechanics and chemistry of the digestive processes.
23.1 Overview of the Digestive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the organs of the alimentary canal from proximal to distal, and briefly state their function
•
Identify the accessory digestive organs and briefly state their function
•
Describe the four fundamental tissue layers of the alimentary canal
•
Contrast the contributions of the enteric and autonomic nervous systems to digestive system functioning
•
Explain how the peritoneum anchors the digestive organs
Figure 23.1
Eating Apples Eating may be one of the simple pleasures in life, but digesting even one apple requires the coordinated work
of many organs. (credit: “Aimanness Photography”/Flickr)
The function of the digestive system is to break down the foods you eat, release their nutrients, and absorb those
nutrients into the body. Although the small intestine is the workhorse of the system, where the majority of digestion
occurs, and where most of the released nutrients are absorbed into the blood or lymph, each of the digestive system
organs makes a vital contribution to this process (Figure 23.2).
FIGURE 23.2
Components of the Digestive System
All digestive organs play integral roles in the life-sustaining process of digestion.
As is the case with all body systems, the digestive system does not work in isolation; it functions cooperatively with
the other systems of the body. Consider for example, the interrelationship between the digestive and cardiovascular
systems. Arteries supply the digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients, and veins drain the digestive
tract. These intestinal veins, constituting the hepatic portal system, are unique; they do not return blood directly to
the heart. Rather, this blood is diverted to the liver where its nutrients are off-loaded for processing before blood
completes its circuit back to the heart. At the same time, the digestive system provides nutrients to the heart
muscle and vascular tissue to support their functioning. The interrelationship of the digestive and endocrine
systems is also critical. Hormones secreted by several endocrine glands, as well as endocrine cells of the pancreas,
the stomach, and the small intestine, contribute to the control of digestion and nutrient metabolism. In turn, the
digestive system provides the nutrients to fuel endocrine function. Table 23.1 gives a quick glimpse at how these
other systems contribute to the functioning of the digestive system.
996
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Contribution of Other Body Systems to the Digestive System
Body system
Benefits received by the digestive system
Cardiovascular
Blood supplies digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients
Endocrine
Endocrine hormones help regulate secretion in digestive glands and accessory organs
Integumentary
Skin helps protect digestive organs and synthesizes vitamin D for calcium absorption
Lymphatic
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue and other lymphatic tissue defend against entry of
pathogens; lacteals absorb lipids; and lymphatic vessels transport lipids to bloodstream
Muscular
Skeletal muscles support and protect abdominal organs
Nervous
Sensory and motor neurons help regulate secretions and muscle contractions in the digestive
tract
Respiratory
Respiratory organs provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide
Skeletal
Bones help protect and support digestive organs
Urinary
Kidneys convert vitamin D into its active form, allowing calcium absorption in the small
intestine
TABLE 23.1
Digestive System Organs
The easiest way to understand the digestive system is to divide its organs into two main categories. The first group is
the organs that make up the alimentary canal. Accessory digestive organs comprise the second group and are
critical for orchestrating the breakdown of food and the assimilation of its nutrients into the body. Accessory
digestive organs, despite their name, are critical to the function of the digestive system.
Alimentary Canal Organs
Also called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract or gut, the alimentary canal (aliment- = “to nourish”) is a one-way tube
about 7.62 meters (25 feet) in length during life and closer to 10.67 meters (35 feet) in length when measured after
death, once smooth muscle tone is lost. The main function of the organs of the alimentary canal is to nourish the
body. This tube begins at the mouth and terminates at the anus. Between those two points, the canal is modified as
the pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and small and large intestines to fit the functional needs of the body. Both the
mouth and anus are open to the external environment; thus, food and wastes within the alimentary canal are
technically considered to be outside the body. Only through the process of absorption do the nutrients in food enter
into and nourish the body’s “inner space.”
Accessory Structures
Each accessory digestive organ aids in the breakdown of food (Figure 23.3). Within the mouth, the teeth and
tongue begin mechanical digestion, whereas the salivary glands begin chemical digestion. Once food products enter
the small intestine, the gallbladder, liver, and pancreas release secretions—such as bile and enzymes—essential for
digestion to continue. Together, these are called accessory organs because they sprout from the lining cells of the
developing gut (mucosa) and augment its function; indeed, you could not live without their vital contributions, and
many significant diseases result from their malfunction. Even after development is complete, they maintain a
connection to the gut by way of ducts.
23.1 • Overview of the Digestive System
997
Histology of the Alimentary Canal
Throughout its length, the alimentary tract is composed of the same four tissue layers; the details of their structural
arrangements vary to fit their specific functions. Starting from the lumen and moving outwards, these layers are the
mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa, which is continuous with the mesentery (see Figure 23.3).
FIGURE 23.3
Layers of the Alimentary Canal
The wall of the alimentary canal has four basic tissue layers: the mucosa, submucosa,
muscularis, and serosa.
The mucosa is referred to as a mucous membrane, because mucus production is a characteristic feature of gut
epithelium. The membrane consists of epithelium, which is in direct contact with ingested food, and the lamina
propria, a layer of connective tissue analogous to the dermis. In addition, the mucosa has a thin, smooth muscle
layer, called the muscularis mucosae (not to be confused with the muscularis layer, described below).
Epithelium—In the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, and anal canal, the epithelium is primarily a non-keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium. In the stomach and intestines, it is a simple columnar epithelium. Notice that the
epithelium is in direct contact with the lumen, the space inside the alimentary canal. Interspersed among its
epithelial cells are goblet cells, which secrete mucus and fluid into the lumen, and enteroendocrine cells, which
secrete hormones into the interstitial spaces between cells. Epithelial cells have a very brief lifespan, averaging from
only a couple of days (in the mouth) to about a week (in the gut). This process of rapid renewal helps preserve the
health of the alimentary canal, despite the wear and tear resulting from continued contact with foodstuffs.
Lamina propria—In addition to loose connective tissue, the lamina propria contains numerous blood and lymphatic
vessels that transport nutrients absorbed through the alimentary canal to other parts of the body. The lamina
propria also serves an immune function by housing clusters of lymphocytes, making up the mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT). These lymphocyte clusters are particularly substantial in the distal ileum where they are
known as Peyer’s patches. When you consider that the alimentary canal is exposed to foodborne bacteria and other
foreign matter, it is not hard to appreciate why the immune system has evolved a means of defending against the
pathogens encountered within it.
Muscularis mucosae—This thin layer of smooth muscle is in a constant state of tension, pulling the mucosa of the
stomach and small intestine into undulating folds. These folds dramatically increase the surface area available for
digestion and absorption.
As its name implies, the submucosa lies immediately beneath the mucosa. A broad layer of dense connective
tissue, it connects the overlying mucosa to the underlying muscularis. It includes blood and lymphatic vessels
(which transport absorbed nutrients), and a scattering of submucosal glands that release digestive secretions.
Additionally, it serves as a conduit for a dense branching network of nerves, the submucosal plexus, which functions
as described below.
The third layer of the alimentary canal is the muscularis (also called the muscularis externa). The muscularis in the
998
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
small intestine is made up of a double layer of smooth muscle: an inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer.
The contractions of these layers promote mechanical digestion, expose more of the food to digestive chemicals, and
move the food along the canal. In the most proximal and distal regions of the alimentary canal, including the mouth,
pharynx, anterior part of the esophagus, and external anal sphincter, the muscularis is made up of skeletal muscle,
which gives you voluntary control over swallowing and defecation. The basic two-layer structure found in the small
intestine is modified in the organs proximal and distal to it. The stomach is equipped for its churning function by the
addition of a third layer, the oblique muscle. While the colon has two layers like the small intestine, its longitudinal
layer is segregated into three narrow parallel bands, the tenia coli, which make it look like a series of pouches rather
than a simple tube.
The serosa is the portion of the alimentary canal superficial to the muscularis. Present only in the region of the
alimentary canal within the abdominal cavity, it consists of a layer of visceral peritoneum overlying a layer of loose
connective tissue. Instead of serosa, the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus have a dense sheath of collagen fibers
called the adventitia. These tissues serve to hold the alimentary canal in place near the ventral surface of the
vertebral column.
Nerve Supply
As soon as food enters the mouth, it is detected by receptors that send impulses along the sensory neurons of
cranial nerves. Without these nerves, not only would your food be without taste, but you would also be unable to
feel either the food or the structures of your mouth, and you would be unable to avoid biting yourself as you chew,
an action enabled by the motor branches of cranial nerves.
Intrinsic innervation of much of the alimentary canal is provided by the enteric nervous system, which runs from the
esophagus to the anus, and contains approximately 100 million motor, sensory, and interneurons (unique to this
system compared to all other parts of the peripheral nervous system). These enteric neurons are grouped into two
plexuses. The myenteric plexus (plexus of Auerbach) lies in the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal and is
responsible for motility, especially the rhythm and force of the contractions of the muscularis. The submucosal
plexus (plexus of Meissner) lies in the submucosal layer and is responsible for regulating digestive secretions and
reacting to the presence of food (see Figure 23.3).
Extrinsic innervations of the alimentary canal are provided by the autonomic nervous system, which includes both
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves. In general, sympathetic activation (the fight-or-flight response) restricts
the activity of enteric neurons, thereby decreasing GI secretion and motility. In contrast, parasympathetic activation
(the rest-and-digest response) increases GI secretion and motility by stimulating neurons of the enteric nervous
system.
Blood Supply
The blood vessels serving the digestive system have two functions. They transport the protein and carbohydrate
nutrients absorbed by mucosal cells after food is digested in the lumen. Lipids are absorbed via lacteals, tiny
structures of the lymphatic system. The blood vessels’ second function is to supply the organs of the alimentary
canal with the nutrients and oxygen needed to drive their cellular processes.
Specifically, the more anterior parts of the alimentary canal are supplied with blood by arteries branching off the
aortic arch and thoracic aorta. Below this point, the alimentary canal is supplied with blood by arteries branching
from the abdominal aorta. The celiac trunk services the liver, stomach, and duodenum, whereas the superior and
inferior mesenteric arteries supply blood to the remaining small and large intestines.
The veins that collect nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine (where most absorption occurs) empty into the
hepatic portal system. This venous network takes the blood into the liver where the nutrients are either processed
or stored for later use. Only then does the blood drained from the alimentary canal viscera circulate back to the
heart. To appreciate just how demanding the digestive process is on the cardiovascular system, consider that while
you are “resting and digesting,” about one-fourth of the blood pumped with each heartbeat enters arteries serving
the intestines.
The Peritoneum
The digestive organs within the abdominal cavity are held in place by the peritoneum, a broad serous membranous
23.1 • Overview of the Digestive System
999
sac made up of squamous epithelial tissue surrounded by connective tissue. It is composed of two different regions:
the parietal peritoneum, which lines the abdominal wall, and the visceral peritoneum, which envelopes the
abdominal organs (Figure 23.4). The peritoneal cavity is the space bounded by the visceral and parietal peritoneal
surfaces. A few milliliters of watery fluid act as a lubricant to minimize friction between the serosal surfaces of the
peritoneum.
FIGURE 23.4
The Peritoneum
A cross-section of the abdomen shows the relationship between abdominal organs and the peritoneum
(darker lines).
The visceral peritoneum includes multiple large folds that envelope various abdominal organs, holding them to the
dorsal surface of the body wall. Within these folds are blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves that innervate
the organs with which they are in contact, supplying their adjacent organs. The five major peritoneal folds are
described in Table 23.2. Note that during fetal development, certain digestive structures, including the first portion
of the small intestine (called the duodenum), the pancreas, and portions of the large intestine (the ascending and
descending colon, and the rectum) remain completely or partially posterior to the peritoneum. Thus, the location of
these organs is described as retroperitoneal.
Disorders of the...
Digestive System: Peritonitis
Inflammation of the peritoneum is called peritonitis. Chemical peritonitis can develop any time the wall of the
alimentary canal is breached, allowing the contents of the lumen entry into the peritoneal cavity. For example,
when an ulcer perforates the stomach wall, gastric juices spill into the peritoneal cavity. Hemorrhagic peritonitis
occurs after a ruptured tubal pregnancy or traumatic injury to the liver or spleen fills the peritoneal cavity with
blood. Even more severe peritonitis is associated with bacterial infections seen with appendicitis, colonic
diverticulitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease (infection of uterine tubes, usually by sexually transmitted
bacteria). Peritonitis is life threatening and often results in emergency surgery to correct the underlying problem
and intensive antibiotic therapy. When your great grandparents and even your parents were young, the mortality
from peritonitis was high. Aggressive surgery, improvements in anesthesia safety, the advance of critical care
expertise, and antibiotics have greatly improved the mortality rate from this condition. Even so, the mortality
rate still ranges from 30 to 40 percent.
1000
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
The Five Major Peritoneal Folds
Fold
Description
Greater
omentum
Apron-like structure that lies superficial to the small intestine and transverse colon; a site of fat
deposition in people who are overweight
Falciform
ligament
Anchors the liver to the anterior abdominal wall and inferior border of the diaphragm
Lesser
omentum
Suspends the stomach from the inferior border of the liver; provides a pathway for structures
connecting to the liver
Mesentery
Vertical band of tissue anterior to the lumbar vertebrae and anchoring all of the small intestine
except the initial portion (the duodenum)
Mesocolon
Attaches two portions of the large intestine (the transverse and sigmoid colon) to the posterior
abdominal wall
TABLE 23.2
INTERACTIVE LINK
By clicking on this link (http://openstax.org/l/fooddigestion) you can watch a short video of what happens to the
food you eat, as it passes from your mouth to your intestine. Along the way, note how the food changes consistency
and form. How does this change in consistency facilitate your gaining nutrients from food?
23.2 Digestive System Processes and Regulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss six fundamental activities of the digestive system, giving an example of each
•
Compare and contrast the neural and hormonal controls involved in digestion
The digestive system uses mechanical and chemical activities to break food down into absorbable substances
during its journey through the digestive system. Table 23.3 provides an overview of the basic functions of the
digestive organs.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/fooddigestion2) for an overview of digestion of food in different regions of the
digestive tract. Note the route of non-fat nutrients from the small intestine to their release as nutrients to the body.
23.2 • Digestive System Processes and Regulation
1001
Functions of the Digestive Organs
Organ
Major functions
Other functions
Mouth
•
Ingests food
•
Chews and mixes food
•
Begins chemical breakdown of
carbohydrates
•
Moves food into the pharynx
•
Begins breakdown of lipids via lingual lipase
•
Moistens and dissolves food, allowing you
to taste it
•
Cleans and lubricates the teeth and oral
cavity
•
Has some antimicrobial activity
Pharynx
•
Propels food from the oral cavity to the
esophagus
•
Lubricates food and passageways
Esophagus
•
Propels food to the stomach
•
Lubricates food and passageways
Stomach
•
Mixes and churns food with gastric juices to
form chyme
•
Begins chemical breakdown of proteins
•
Releases food into the duodenum as chyme
•
Absorbs some fat-soluble substances (for
example, alcohol, aspirin)
•
Possesses antimicrobial functions
•
Stimulates protein-digesting enzymes
•
Secretes intrinsic factor required for
vitamin B12 absorption in small intestine
Small
intestine
•
Mixes chyme with digestive juices
•
Propels food at a rate slow enough for
digestion and absorption
•
Absorbs breakdown products of
carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleic
acids, along with vitamins, minerals, and
water
•
Performs physical digestion via segmentation
•
Provides optimal medium for enzymatic
activity
Accessory
organs
•
Liver: produces bile salts, which emulsify
lipids, aiding their digestion and absorption
•
Gallbladder: stores, concentrates, and
releases bile
•
Pancreas: produces digestive enzymes and
bicarbonate
•
Bicarbonate-rich pancreatic juices help
neutralize acidic chyme and provide
optimal environment for enzymatic activity
Large
intestine
•
Further breaks down food residues
•
Absorbs most residual water, electrolytes,
and vitamins produced by enteric bacteria
•
Propels feces toward rectum
•
Eliminates feces
•
Food residue is concentrated and
temporarily stored prior to defecation
•
Mucus eases passage of feces through
colon
TABLE 23.3
1002
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Digestive Processes
The processes of digestion include six activities: ingestion, propulsion, mechanical or physical digestion, chemical
digestion, absorption, and defecation.
The first of these processes, ingestion, refers to the entry of food into the alimentary canal through the mouth.
There, the food is chewed and mixed with saliva, which contains enzymes that begin breaking down the
carbohydrates in the food plus some lipid digestion via lingual lipase. Chewing increases the surface area of the food
and allows an appropriately sized bolus to be produced.
Food leaves the mouth when the tongue and pharyngeal muscles propel it into the esophagus. This act of
swallowing, the last voluntary act until defecation, is an example of propulsion, which refers to the movement of
food through the digestive tract. It includes both the voluntary process of swallowing and the involuntary process of
peristalsis. Peristalsis consists of sequential, alternating waves of contraction and relaxation of alimentary wall
smooth muscles, which act to propel food along (Figure 23.5). These waves also play a role in mixing food with
digestive juices. Peristalsis is so powerful that foods and liquids you swallow enter your stomach even if you are
standing on your head.
FIGURE 23.5
Peristalsis
Peristalsis moves food through the digestive tract with alternating waves of muscle contraction and relaxation.
Digestion includes both mechanical and chemical processes. Mechanical digestion is a purely physical process that
does not change the chemical nature of the food. Instead, it makes the food smaller to increase both surface area
and mobility. It includes mastication, or chewing, as well as tongue movements that help break food into smaller
bits and mix food with saliva. Although there may be a tendency to think that mechanical digestion is limited to the
first steps of the digestive process, it occurs after the food leaves the mouth, as well. The mechanical churning of
food in the stomach serves to further break it apart and expose more of its surface area to digestive juices, creating
an acidic “soup” called chyme. Segmentation, which occurs mainly in the small intestine, consists of localized
contractions of circular muscle of the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal. These contractions isolate small
sections of the intestine, moving their contents back and forth while continuously subdividing, breaking up, and
mixing the contents. By moving food back and forth in the intestinal lumen, segmentation mixes food with digestive
juices and facilitates absorption.
In chemical digestion, starting in the mouth, digestive secretions break down complex food molecules into their
chemical building blocks (for example, proteins into separate amino acids). These secretions vary in composition,
but typically contain water, various enzymes, acids, and salts. The process is completed in the small intestine.
Food that has been broken down is of no value to the body unless it enters the bloodstream and its nutrients are put
to work. This occurs through the process of absorption, which takes place primarily within the small intestine.
There, most nutrients are absorbed from the lumen of the alimentary canal into the bloodstream through the
epithelial cells that make up the mucosa. Lipids are absorbed into lacteals and are transported via the lymphatic
vessels to the bloodstream (the subclavian veins near the heart). The details of these processes will be discussed
later.
In defecation, the final step in digestion, undigested materials are removed from the body as feces.
23.2 • Digestive System Processes and Regulation
1003
In some cases, a single organ is in charge of a digestive process. For example, ingestion occurs only in the mouth
and defecation only in the anus. However, most digestive processes involve the interaction of several organs and
occur gradually as food moves through the alimentary canal (Figure 23.6).
FIGURE 23.6
Digestive Processes
The digestive processes are ingestion, propulsion, mechanical digestion, chemical digestion,
absorption, and defecation.
Some chemical digestion occurs in the mouth. Some absorption can occur in the mouth and stomach, for example,
alcohol and aspirin.
Regulatory Mechanisms
Neural and endocrine regulatory mechanisms work to maintain the optimal conditions in the lumen needed for
Aging and the...
Digestive System: From Appetite Suppression to Constipation
Age-related changes in the digestive system begin in the mouth and can affect virtually every aspect of the
digestive system. Taste buds become less sensitive, so food isn’t as appetizing as it once was. A slice of pizza is
a challenge, not a treat, when you have lost teeth, your gums are diseased, and your salivary glands aren’t
producing enough saliva. Swallowing can be difficult, and ingested food moves slowly through the alimentary
canal because of reduced strength and tone of muscular tissue. Neurosensory feedback is also dampened,
slowing the transmission of messages that stimulate the release of enzymes and hormones.
Pathologies that affect the digestive organs—such as hiatal hernia, gastritis, and peptic ulcer disease—can occur
at greater frequencies as you age. Problems in the small intestine may include duodenal ulcers, maldigestion,
and malabsorption. Problems in the large intestine include hemorrhoids, diverticular disease, and constipation.
Conditions that affect the function of accessory organs—and their abilities to deliver pancreatic enzymes and
bile to the small intestine—include jaundice, acute pancreatitis, cirrhosis, and gallstones.
1004
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
digestion and absorption. These regulatory mechanisms, which stimulate digestive activity through mechanical and
chemical activity, are controlled both extrinsically and intrinsically.
Neural Controls
The walls of the alimentary canal contain a variety of sensors that help regulate digestive functions. These include
mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and osmoreceptors, which are capable of detecting mechanical, chemical, and
osmotic stimuli, respectively. For example, these receptors can sense when the presence of food has caused the
stomach to expand, whether food particles have been sufficiently broken down, how much liquid is present, and the
type of nutrients in the food (lipids, carbohydrates, and/or proteins). Stimulation of these receptors provokes an
appropriate reflex that furthers the process of digestion. This may entail sending a message that activates the
glands that secrete digestive juices into the lumen, or it may mean the stimulation of muscles within the alimentary
canal, thereby activating peristalsis and segmentation that move food along the intestinal tract.
The walls of the entire alimentary canal are embedded with nerve plexuses that interact with the central nervous
system and other nerve plexuses—either within the same digestive organ or in different ones. These interactions
prompt several types of reflexes. Extrinsic nerve plexuses orchestrate long reflexes, which involve the central and
autonomic nervous systems and work in response to stimuli from outside the digestive system. Short reflexes, on
the other hand, are orchestrated by intrinsic nerve plexuses within the alimentary canal wall. These two plexuses
and their connections were introduced earlier as the enteric nervous system. Short reflexes regulate activities in one
area of the digestive tract and may coordinate local peristaltic movements and stimulate digestive secretions. For
example, the sight, smell, and taste of food initiate long reflexes that begin with a sensory neuron delivering a signal
to the medulla oblongata. The response to the signal is to stimulate cells in the stomach to begin secreting digestive
juices in preparation for incoming food. In contrast, food that distends the stomach initiates short reflexes that
cause cells in the stomach wall to increase their secretion of digestive juices.
Hormonal Controls
A variety of hormones are involved in the digestive process. The main digestive hormone of the stomach is gastrin,
which is secreted in response to the presence of food. Gastrin stimulates the secretion of gastric acid by the parietal
cells of the stomach mucosa. Other GI hormones are produced and act upon the gut and its accessory organs.
Hormones produced by the duodenum include secretin, which stimulates a watery secretion of bicarbonate by the
pancreas; cholecystokinin (CCK), which stimulates the secretion of pancreatic enzymes and bile from the liver and
release of bile from the gallbladder; and gastric inhibitory peptide, which inhibits gastric secretion and slows gastric
emptying and motility. These GI hormones are secreted by specialized epithelial cells, called endocrinocytes,
located in the mucosal epithelium of the stomach and small intestine. These hormones then enter the bloodstream,
through which they can reach their target organs.
23.3 The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structures of the mouth, including its three accessory digestive organs
•
Group the 32 adult teeth according to name, location, and function
•
Describe the process of swallowing, including the roles of the tongue, upper esophageal sphincter, and
epiglottis
•
Trace the pathway food follows from ingestion into the mouth through release into the stomach
In this section, you will examine the anatomy and functions of the three main organs of the upper alimentary
canal—the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus—as well as three associated accessory organs—the tongue, salivary
glands, and teeth.
The Mouth
The cheeks, tongue, and palate frame the mouth, which is also called the oral cavity (or buccal cavity). The
structures of the mouth are illustrated in Figure 23.7.
At the entrance to the mouth are the lips, or labia (singular = labium). Their outer covering is skin, which transitions
to a mucous membrane in the mouth proper. Lips are very vascular with a thin layer of keratin; hence, the reason
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1005
they are "red." They have a huge representation on the cerebral cortex, which probably explains the human
fascination with kissing! The lips cover the orbicularis oris muscle, which regulates what comes in and goes out of
the mouth. The labial frenulum is a midline fold of mucous membrane that attaches the inner surface of each lip to
the gum. The cheeks make up the oral cavity’s sidewalls. While their outer covering is skin, their inner covering is
mucous membrane. This membrane is made up of non-keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. Between the
skin and mucous membranes are connective tissue and buccinator muscles. The next time you eat some food,
notice how the buccinator muscles in your cheeks and the orbicularis oris muscle in your lips contract, helping you
keep the food from falling out of your mouth. Additionally, notice how these muscles work when you are speaking.
The pocket-like part of the mouth that is framed on the inside by the gums and teeth, and on the outside by the
cheeks and lips is called the oral vestibule. Moving farther into the mouth, the opening between the oral cavity and
throat (oropharynx) is called the fauces (like the kitchen "faucet"). The main open area of the mouth, or oral cavity
proper, runs from the gums and teeth to the fauces.
When you are chewing, you do not find it difficult to breathe simultaneously. The next time you have food in your
mouth, notice how the arched shape of the roof of your mouth allows you to handle both digestion and respiration at
the same time. This arch is called the palate. The anterior region of the palate serves as a wall (or septum) between
the oral and nasal cavities as well as a rigid shelf against which the tongue can push food. It is created by the
maxillary and palatine bones of the skull and, given its bony structure, is known as the hard palate. If you run your
tongue along the roof of your mouth, you’ll notice that the hard palate ends in the posterior oral cavity, and the
tissue becomes fleshier. This part of the palate, known as the soft palate, is composed mainly of skeletal muscle.
You can therefore manipulate, subconsciously, the soft palate—for instance, to yawn, swallow, or sing (see Figure
23.7).
FIGURE 23.7
Mouth
The mouth includes the lips, tongue, palate, gums, and teeth.
A fleshy bead of tissue called the uvula drops down from the center of the posterior edge of the soft palate. Although
some have suggested that the uvula is a vestigial organ, it serves an important purpose. When you swallow, the soft
1006
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
palate and uvula move upward, helping to keep foods and liquid from entering the nasal cavity. Unfortunately, it can
also contribute to the sound produced by snoring. Two muscular folds extend downward from the soft palate, on
either side of the uvula. Toward the front, the palatoglossal arch lies next to the base of the tongue; behind it, the
palatopharyngeal arch forms the superior and lateral margins of the fauces. Between these two arches are the
palatine tonsils, clusters of lymphoid tissue that protect the pharynx. The lingual tonsils are located at the base of
the tongue.
The Tongue
Perhaps you have heard it said that the tongue is the strongest muscle in the body. Those who stake this claim cite
its strength proportionate to its size. Although it is difficult to quantify the relative strength of different muscles, it
remains indisputable that the tongue is a workhorse, facilitating ingestion, mechanical digestion, chemical digestion
(lingual lipase), sensation (of taste, texture, and temperature of food), swallowing, and vocalization.
The tongue is attached to the mandible, the styloid processes of the temporal bones, and the hyoid bone. The hyoid
is unique in that it only distantly/indirectly articulates with other bones. The tongue is positioned over the floor of
the oral cavity. A medial septum extends the entire length of the tongue, dividing it into symmetrical halves.
Beneath its mucous membrane covering, each half of the tongue is composed of the same number and type of
intrinsic and extrinsic skeletal muscles. The intrinsic muscles (those within the tongue) are the longitudinalis
inferior, longitudinalis superior, transversus linguae, and verticalis linguae muscles. These allow you to change the
size and shape of your tongue, as well as to stick it out, if you wish. Having such a flexible tongue facilitates both
swallowing and speech.
As you learned in your study of the muscular system, the extrinsic muscles of the tongue are the palatoglossus,
hyoglossus, styloglossus, and genioglossus muscles. These muscles originate outside the tongue and insert into
connective tissues within the tongue. The mylohyoid is responsible for raising the tongue, the hyoglossus pulls it
down and back, the styloglossus pulls it up and back, and the genioglossus pulls it forward. Working in concert,
these muscles perform three important digestive functions in the mouth: (1) position food for optimal chewing, (2)
gather food into a bolus (rounded mass), and (3) position food so it can be swallowed.
The top and sides of the tongue are studded with papillae, extensions of lamina propria of the mucosa, which are
covered in stratified squamous epithelium (Figure 23.8). Fungiform papillae, which are mushroom shaped, cover a
large area of the tongue; they tend to be larger toward the rear of the tongue and smaller on the tip and sides. In
contrast, filiform papillae are long and thin. Fungiform papillae contain taste buds, and filiform papillae have touch
receptors that help the tongue move food around in the mouth. The filiform papillae create an abrasive surface that
performs mechanically, much like a cat’s rough tongue that is used for grooming. Lingual glands in the lamina
propria of the tongue secrete mucus and a watery serous fluid that contains the enzyme lingual lipase, which plays
a minor role in breaking down triglycerides but does not begin working until it is activated in the stomach. A fold of
mucous membrane on the underside of the tongue, the lingual frenulum, tethers the tongue to the floor of the
mouth. People with the congenital anomaly ankyloglossia, also known by the non-medical term “tongue tie,” have a
lingual frenulum that is too short or otherwise malformed. Severe ankyloglossia can impair speech and must be
corrected with surgery.
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1007
FIGURE 23.8
Tongue
This superior view of the tongue shows the locations and types of lingual papillae.
The Salivary Glands
Many small salivary glands are housed within the mucous membranes of the mouth and tongue. These minor
exocrine glands are constantly secreting saliva, either directly into the oral cavity or indirectly through ducts, even
while you sleep. In fact, an average of 1 to 1.5 liters of saliva is secreted each day. Usually just enough saliva is
present to moisten the mouth and teeth. Secretion increases when you eat, because saliva is essential to moisten
food and initiate the chemical breakdown of carbohydrates. Small amounts of saliva are also secreted by the labial
glands in the lips. In addition, the buccal glands in the cheeks, palatal glands in the palate, and lingual glands in the
tongue help ensure that all areas of the mouth are supplied with adequate saliva.
The Major Salivary Glands
Outside the oral mucosa are three pairs of major salivary glands, which secrete the majority of saliva into ducts that
open into the mouth:
•
The submandibular glands, which are in the floor of the mouth, secrete saliva into the mouth through the
submandibular ducts.
•
The sublingual glands, which lie below the tongue, use the lesser sublingual ducts to secrete saliva into the
oral cavity.
•
The parotid glands lie between the skin and the masseter muscle, near the ears. They secrete saliva into the
mouth through the parotid duct, which is located near the second upper molar tooth (Figure 23.9).
Saliva
Saliva is essentially (98 to 99.5 percent) water. The remaining 4.5 percent is a complex mixture of ions,
glycoproteins, enzymes, growth factors, and waste products. Perhaps the most important ingredient in saliva from
the perspective of digestion is the enzyme salivary amylase, which initiates the breakdown of carbohydrates. Food
does not spend enough time in the mouth to allow all the carbohydrates to break down, but salivary amylase
continues acting until it is inactivated by stomach acids. Bicarbonate and phosphate ions function as chemical
buffers, maintaining saliva at a pH between 6.35 and 6.85. Salivary mucus helps lubricate food, facilitating
movement in the mouth, bolus formation, and swallowing. Saliva contains immunoglobulin A, which prevents
microbes from penetrating the epithelium, and lysozyme, which makes saliva antimicrobial. Saliva also contains
epidermal growth factor, which might have given rise to the adage “a mother’s kiss can heal a wound.”
Each of the major salivary glands secretes a unique formulation of saliva according to its cellular makeup. For
example, the parotid glands secrete a watery solution that contains salivary amylase. The submandibular glands
have cells similar to those of the parotid glands, as well as mucus-secreting cells. Therefore, saliva secreted by the
submandibular glands also contains amylase but in a liquid thickened with mucus. The sublingual glands contain
mostly mucous cells, and they secrete the thickest saliva with the least amount of salivary amylase.
1008
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 23.9
Salivary glands
The major salivary glands are located outside the oral mucosa and deliver saliva into the mouth through
ducts.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
The Parotid Glands: Mumps
Infections of the nasal passages and pharynx can attack any salivary gland. The parotid glands are the usual site of
infection with the virus that causes mumps (paramyxovirus). Mumps manifests by enlargement and inflammation of
the parotid glands, causing a characteristic swelling between the ears and the jaw. Symptoms include fever and
throat pain, which can be severe when swallowing acidic substances such as orange juice.
In about one-third of males who are past puberty, mumps also causes testicular inflammation, typically affecting
only one testis and rarely resulting in sterility. With the increasing use and effectiveness of mumps vaccines, the
incidence of mumps has decreased dramatically. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), the number of mumps cases dropped from more than 150,000 in 1968 to fewer than 1700 in 1993 to only
11 reported cases in 2011.
Regulation of Salivation
The autonomic nervous system regulates salivation (the secretion of saliva). In the absence of food,
parasympathetic stimulation keeps saliva flowing at just the right level for comfort as you speak, swallow, sleep, and
generally go about life. Over-salivation can occur, for example, if you are stimulated by the smell of food, but that
food is not available for you to eat. Drooling is an extreme instance of the overproduction of saliva. During times of
stress, such as before speaking in public, sympathetic stimulation takes over, reducing salivation and producing the
symptom of dry mouth often associated with anxiety. When you are dehydrated, salivation is reduced, causing the
mouth to feel dry and prompting you to take action to quench your thirst.
Salivation can be stimulated by the sight, smell, and taste of food. It can even be stimulated by thinking about food.
You might notice whether reading about food and salivation right now has had any effect on your production of
saliva.
How does the salivation process work while you are eating? Food contains chemicals that stimulate taste receptors
on the tongue, which send impulses to the superior and inferior salivatory nuclei in the brain stem. These two nuclei
then send back parasympathetic impulses through fibers in the glossopharyngeal and facial nerves, which stimulate
salivation. Even after you swallow food, salivation is increased to cleanse the mouth and to water down and
neutralize any irritating chemical remnants, such as that hot sauce in your burrito. Most saliva is swallowed along
with food and is reabsorbed, so that fluid is not lost.
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1009
The Teeth
The teeth, or dentes (singular = dens), are organs similar to bones that you use to tear, grind, and otherwise
mechanically break down food.
Types of Teeth
During the course of your lifetime, you have two sets of teeth (one set of teeth is a dentition). Your 20 deciduous
teeth, or baby teeth, first begin to appear at about 6 months of age. Between approximately age 6 and 12, these
teeth are replaced by 32 permanent teeth. Moving from the center of the mouth toward the side, these are as
follows (Figure 23.10):
•
The eight incisors, four top and four bottom, are the sharp front teeth you use for biting into food.
•
The four cuspids (or canines) flank the incisors and have a pointed edge (cusp) to tear up food. These fang-like
teeth are superb for piercing tough or fleshy foods.
•
Posterior to the cuspids are the eight premolars (or bicuspids), which have an overall flatter shape with two
rounded cusps useful for mashing foods.
•
The most posterior and largest are the 12 molars, which have several pointed cusps used to crush food so it is
ready for swallowing. The third members of each set of three molars, top and bottom, are commonly referred to
as the wisdom teeth, because their eruption is commonly delayed until early adulthood. It is not uncommon for
wisdom teeth to fail to erupt; that is, they remain impacted. In these cases, the teeth are typically removed by
orthodontic surgery.
1010
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 23.10
Permanent and Deciduous Teeth
This figure of two human dentitions shows the arrangement of teeth in the maxilla
and mandible, and the relationship between the deciduous and permanent teeth.
Anatomy of a Tooth
The teeth are secured in the alveolar processes (sockets) of the maxilla and the mandible. Gingivae (commonly
called the gums) are soft tissues that line the alveolar processes and surround the necks of the teeth. Teeth are also
held in their sockets by a connective tissue called the periodontal ligament.
The two main parts of a tooth are the crown, which is the portion projecting above the gum line, and the root, which
is embedded within the maxilla and mandible. Both parts contain an inner pulp cavity, containing loose connective
tissue through which run nerves and blood vessels. The region of the pulp cavity that runs through the root of the
tooth is called the root canal. Surrounding the pulp cavity is dentin, a bone-like tissue. In the root of each tooth, the
dentin is covered by an even harder bone-like layer called cementum. In the crown of each tooth, the dentin is
covered by an outer layer of enamel, the hardest substance in the body (Figure 23.11).
Although enamel protects the underlying dentin and pulp cavity, it is still nonetheless susceptible to mechanical and
chemical erosion, or what is known as tooth decay. The most common form, dental caries (cavities) develops when
colonies of bacteria feeding on sugars in the mouth release acids that cause soft tissue inflammation and
degradation of the calcium crystals of the enamel. The digestive functions of the mouth are summarized in Table
23.4.
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1011
FIGURE 23.11
The Structure of the Tooth
This longitudinal section through a molar in its alveolar socket shows the relationships
between enamel, dentin, and pulp.
Digestive Functions of the Mouth
Structure
Action
Outcome
Lips and
cheeks
Confine food
between teeth
•
Food is chewed evenly during mastication
Salivary
glands
Secrete saliva
•
Moisten and lubricate the lining of the mouth and pharynx
•
Moisten, soften, and dissolve food
•
Clean the mouth and teeth
•
Salivary amylase breaks down starch
Tongue’s
extrinsic
muscles
Move tongue
sideways, and in
and out
•
Manipulate food for chewing
•
Shape food into a bolus
•
Manipulate food for swallowing
Tongue’s
intrinsic
muscles
Change tongue
shape
•
Manipulate food for swallowing
Taste buds
Sense food in
mouth and sense
taste
•
Nerve impulses from taste buds are conducted to salivary nuclei in the
brain stem and then to salivary glands, stimulating saliva secretion
Lingual
glands
Secrete lingual
lipase
•
Activated in the stomach
•
Break down triglycerides into fatty acids and diglycerides
Teeth
Shred and crush
food
•
Break down solid food into smaller particles for deglutition
TABLE 23.4
1012
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
The Pharynx
The pharynx (throat) is involved in both digestion and respiration. It receives food and air from the mouth, and air
from the nasal cavities. When food enters the pharynx, involuntary muscle contractions close off the air
passageways.
A short tube of skeletal muscle lined with a mucous membrane, the pharynx runs from the posterior oral and nasal
cavities to the opening of the esophagus and larynx. It has three subdivisions. The most superior, the nasopharynx,
is involved only in breathing and speech. The other two subdivisions, the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx, are
used for both breathing and digestion. The oropharynx begins inferior to the nasopharynx and is continuous below
with the laryngopharynx (Figure 23.12). The inferior border of the laryngopharynx connects to the esophagus,
whereas the anterior portion connects to the larynx, allowing air to flow into the bronchial tree.
FIGURE 23.12
Pharynx
The pharynx runs from the nostrils to the esophagus and the larynx.
Histologically, the wall of the oropharynx is similar to that of the oral cavity. The mucosa includes a stratified
squamous epithelium that is endowed with mucus-producing glands. During swallowing, the elevator skeletal
muscles of the pharynx contract, raising and expanding the pharynx to receive the bolus of food. Once received,
these muscles relax and the constrictor muscles of the pharynx contract, forcing the bolus into the esophagus and
initiating peristalsis.
Usually during swallowing, the soft palate and uvula rise reflexively to close off the entrance to the nasopharynx. At
the same time, the larynx is pulled superiorly and the cartilaginous epiglottis, its most superior structure, folds
inferiorly, covering the glottis (the opening to the larynx); this process effectively blocks access to the trachea and
bronchi. When the food “goes down the wrong way,” it goes into the trachea. When food enters the trachea, the
reaction is to cough, which usually forces the food up and out of the trachea, and back into the pharynx.
The Esophagus
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the pharynx to the stomach. It is approximately 25.4 cm (10 in) in
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1013
length, located posterior to the trachea, and remains in a collapsed form when not engaged in swallowing. As you
can see in Figure 23.13, the esophagus runs a mainly straight route through the mediastinum of the thorax. To enter
the abdomen, the esophagus penetrates the diaphragm through an opening called the esophageal hiatus.
Passage of Food through the Esophagus
The upper esophageal sphincter, which is continuous with the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, controls the
movement of food from the pharynx into the esophagus. The upper two-thirds of the esophagus consists of both
smooth and skeletal muscle fibers, with the latter fading out in the bottom third of the esophagus. Rhythmic waves
of peristalsis, which begin in the upper esophagus, propel the bolus of food toward the stomach. Meanwhile,
secretions from the esophageal mucosa lubricate the esophagus and food. Food passes from the esophagus into the
stomach at the lower esophageal sphincter (also called the gastroesophageal or cardiac sphincter). Recall that
sphincters are muscles that surround tubes and serve as valves, closing the tube when the sphincters contract and
opening it when they relax. The lower esophageal sphincter relaxes to let food pass into the stomach, and then
contracts to prevent stomach acids from backing up into the esophagus. Surrounding this sphincter is the muscular
diaphragm, which helps close off the sphincter when no food is being swallowed. When the lower esophageal
sphincter does not completely close, the stomach’s contents can reflux (that is, back up into the esophagus),
causing heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
FIGURE 23.13
Esophagus
The upper esophageal sphincter controls the movement of food from the pharynx to the esophagus. The
lower esophageal sphincter controls the movement of food from the esophagus to the stomach.
Histology of the Esophagus
The mucosa of the esophagus is made up of an epithelial lining that contains non-keratinized, stratified squamous
epithelium, with a layer of basal and parabasal cells. This epithelium protects against erosion from food particles.
The mucosa’s lamina propria contains mucus-secreting glands. The muscularis layer changes according to location:
In the upper third of the esophagus, the muscularis is skeletal muscle. In the middle third, it is both skeletal and
smooth muscle. In the lower third, it is smooth muscle. As mentioned previously, the most superficial layer of the
esophagus is called the adventitia, not the serosa. In contrast to the stomach and intestines, the loose connective
tissue of the adventitia is not covered by a fold of visceral peritoneum. The digestive functions of the esophagus are
identified in Table 23.5.
1014
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Digestive Functions of the Esophagus
Action
Outcome
Upper esophageal
sphincter relaxation
Allows the bolus to move from the laryngopharynx to the esophagus
Peristalsis
Propels the bolus through the esophagus
Lower esophageal
sphincter relaxation
Allows the bolus to move from the esophagus into the stomach and prevents
chyme from entering the esophagus
Mucus secretion
Lubricates the esophagus, allowing easy passage of the bolus
TABLE 23.5
Deglutition
Deglutition is another word for swallowing—the movement of food from the mouth to the stomach. The entire
process takes about 4 to 8 seconds for solid or semisolid food, and about 1 second for very soft food and liquids.
Although this sounds quick and effortless, deglutition is, in fact, a complex process that involves both the skeletal
muscle of the tongue and the muscles of the pharynx and esophagus. It is aided by the presence of mucus and
saliva. There are three stages in deglutition: the voluntary phase, the pharyngeal phase, and the esophageal phase
(Figure 23.14). The autonomic nervous system controls the latter two phases.
FIGURE 23.14
Deglutition
Deglutition includes the voluntary phase and two involuntary phases: the pharyngeal phase and the
esophageal phase.
The Voluntary Phase
The voluntary phase of deglutition (also known as the oral or buccal phase) is so called because you can control
when you swallow food. In this phase, chewing has been completed and swallowing is set in motion. The tongue
moves upward and backward against the palate, pushing the bolus to the back of the oral cavity and into the
oropharynx. Other muscles keep the mouth closed and prevent food from falling out. At this point, the two
involuntary phases of swallowing begin.
The Pharyngeal Phase
In the pharyngeal phase, stimulation of receptors in the oropharynx sends impulses to the deglutition center (a
collection of neurons that controls swallowing) in the medulla oblongata. Impulses are then sent back to the uvula
23.3 • The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
1015
and soft palate, causing them to move upward and close off the nasopharynx. The laryngeal muscles also constrict
to prevent aspiration of food into the trachea. At this point, deglutition apnea takes place, which means that
breathing ceases for a very brief time. Contractions of the pharyngeal constrictor muscles move the bolus through
the oropharynx and laryngopharynx. Relaxation of the upper esophageal sphincter then allows food to enter the
esophagus.
The Esophageal Phase
The entry of food into the esophagus marks the beginning of the esophageal phase of deglutition and the initiation of
peristalsis. As in the previous phase, the complex neuromuscular actions are controlled by the medulla oblongata.
Peristalsis propels the bolus through the esophagus and toward the stomach. The circular muscle layer of the
muscularis contracts, pinching the esophageal wall and forcing the bolus forward. At the same time, the longitudinal
muscle layer of the muscularis also contracts, shortening this area and pushing out its walls to receive the bolus. In
this way, a series of contractions keeps moving food toward the stomach. When the bolus nears the stomach,
distention of the esophagus initiates a short reflex relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter that allows the
bolus to pass into the stomach. During the esophageal phase, esophageal glands secrete mucus that lubricates the
bolus and minimizes friction.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/swallowing) to see how swallowing is a complex process that involves
the nervous system to coordinate the actions of upper respiratory and digestive activities. During which stage of
swallowing is there a risk of food entering respiratory pathways and how is this risk blocked?
23.4 The Stomach
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Label on a diagram the four main regions of the stomach, its curvatures, and its sphincter
•
Identify the four main types of secreting cells in gastric glands, and their important products
•
Explain why the stomach does not digest itself
•
Describe the mechanical and chemical digestion of food entering the stomach
Although a minimal amount of carbohydrate digestion occurs in the mouth, chemical digestion really gets underway
in the stomach. An expansion of the alimentary canal that lies immediately inferior to the esophagus, the stomach
links the esophagus to the first part of the small intestine (the duodenum) and is relatively fixed in place at its
esophageal and duodenal ends. In between, however, it can be a highly active structure, contracting and continually
changing position and size. These contractions provide mechanical assistance to digestion. The empty stomach is
only about the size of your fist, but can stretch to hold as much as 4 liters of food and fluid, or more than 75 times its
empty volume, and then return to its resting size when empty. Although you might think that the size of a person’s
stomach is related to how much food that individual consumes, body weight does not correlate with stomach size.
Rather, when you eat greater quantities of food—such as at holiday dinner—you stretch the stomach more than when
you eat less.
Popular culture tends to refer to the stomach as the location where all digestion takes place. Of course, this is not
true. An important function of the stomach is to serve as a temporary holding chamber. You can ingest a meal far
more quickly than it can be digested and absorbed by the small intestine. Thus, the stomach holds food and parses
only small amounts into the small intestine at a time. Foods are not processed in the order they are eaten; rather,
they are mixed together with digestive juices in the stomach until they are converted into chyme, which is released
into the small intestine.
As you will see in the sections that follow, the stomach plays several important roles in chemical digestion, including
the continued digestion of carbohydrates and the initial digestion of proteins and triglycerides. Little if any nutrient
absorption occurs in the stomach, with the exception of the negligible amount of nutrients in alcohol.
Structure
There are four main regions in the stomach: the cardia, fundus, body, and pylorus (Figure 23.15). The cardia (or
1016
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
cardiac region) is the point where the esophagus connects to the stomach and through which food passes into the
stomach. Located inferior to the diaphragm, above and to the left of the cardia, is the dome-shaped fundus. Below
the fundus is the body, the main part of the stomach. The funnel-shaped pylorus connects the stomach to the
duodenum. The wider end of the funnel, the pyloric antrum, connects to the body of the stomach. The narrower end
is called the pyloric canal, which connects to the duodenum. The smooth muscle pyloric sphincter is located at
this latter point of connection and controls stomach emptying. In the absence of food, the stomach deflates inward,
and its mucosa and submucosa fall into a large fold called a ruga.
FIGURE 23.15
Stomach
The stomach has four major regions: the cardia, fundus, body, and pylorus. The addition of an inner oblique
smooth muscle layer gives the muscularis the ability to vigorously churn and mix food.
The convex lateral surface of the stomach is called the greater curvature; the concave medial border is the lesser
curvature. The stomach is held in place by the lesser omentum, which extends from the liver to the lesser curvature,
and the greater omentum, which runs from the greater curvature to the posterior abdominal wall.
Histology
The wall of the stomach is made of the same four layers as most of the rest of the alimentary canal, but with
adaptations to the mucosa and muscularis for the unique functions of this organ. In addition to the typical circular
and longitudinal smooth muscle layers, the muscularis has an inner oblique smooth muscle layer (Figure 23.16). As
a result, in addition to moving food through the canal, the stomach can vigorously churn food, mechanically breaking
it down into smaller particles.
23.4 • The Stomach
1017
FIGURE 23.16
Histology of the Stomach
The stomach wall is adapted for the functions of the stomach. In the epithelium, gastric pits
lead to gastric glands that secrete gastric juice. The gastric glands (one gland is shown enlarged on the right) contain different types of cells
that secrete a variety of enzymes, including hydrochloride acid, which activates the protein-digesting enzyme pepsin.
The stomach mucosa’s epithelial lining consists only of surface mucus cells, which secrete a protective coat of
alkaline mucus. A vast number of gastric pits dot the surface of the epithelium, giving it the appearance of a well-
used pincushion, and mark the entry to each gastric gland, which secretes a complex digestive fluid referred to as
gastric juice.
Although the walls of the gastric pits are made up primarily of mucus cells, the gastric glands are made up of
different types of cells. The glands of the cardia and pylorus are composed primarily of mucus-secreting cells. Cells
that make up the pyloric antrum secrete mucus and a number of hormones, including the majority of the stimulatory
hormone, gastrin. The much larger glands of the fundus and body of the stomach, the site of most chemical
digestion, produce most of the gastric secretions. These glands are made up of a variety of secretory cells. These
include parietal cells, chief cells, mucous neck cells, and enteroendocrine cells.
Parietal cells—Located primarily in the middle region of the gastric glands are parietal cells, which are among the
most highly differentiated of the body’s epithelial cells. These relatively large cells produce both hydrochloric acid
(HCl) and intrinsic factor. HCl is responsible for the high acidity (pH 1.5 to 3.5) of the stomach contents and is
needed to activate the protein-digesting enzyme, pepsin. The acidity also kills much of the bacteria you ingest with
food and helps to denature proteins, making them more available for enzymatic digestion. Intrinsic factor is a
glycoprotein necessary for the absorption of vitamin B12 in the small intestine.
Chief cells—Located primarily in the basal regions of gastric glands are chief cells, which secrete pepsinogen, the
inactive proenzyme form of pepsin. HCl is necessary for the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin.
Mucous neck cells—Gastric glands in the upper part of the stomach contain mucous neck cells that secrete thin,
acidic mucus that is much different from the mucus secreted by the goblet cells of the surface epithelium. The role
of this mucus is not currently known.
Enteroendocrine cells—Finally, enteroendocrine cells found in the gastric glands secrete various hormones into the
interstitial fluid of the lamina propria. These include gastrin, which is released mainly by enteroendocrine G cells.
Table 23.6 describes the digestive functions of important hormones secreted by the stomach.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/stomach1) that depicts the structure of the stomach and how this
structure functions in the initiation of protein digestion. This view of the stomach shows the characteristic rugae.
What is the function of these rugae?
1018
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Hormones Secreted by the Stomach
Hormone
Production site
Production stimulus
Target organ
Action
Gastrin
Stomach mucosa,
mainly G cells of the
pyloric antrum
Presence of peptides
and amino acids in
stomach
Stomach
Increases secretion by
gastric glands; promotes
gastric emptying
Gastrin
Stomach mucosa,
mainly G cells of the
pyloric antrum
Presence of peptides
and amino acids in
stomach
Small
intestine
Promotes intestinal
muscle contraction
Gastrin
Stomach mucosa,
mainly G cells of the
pyloric antrum
Presence of peptides
and amino acids in
stomach
Ileocecal
valve
Relaxes valve
Gastrin
Stomach mucosa,
mainly G cells of the
pyloric antrum
Presence of peptides
and amino acids in
stomach
Large
intestine
Triggers mass
movements
Ghrelin
Stomach mucosa,
mainly fundus
Fasting state (levels
increase just prior to
meals)
Hypothalamus
Regulates food intake,
primarily by stimulating
hunger and satiety
Histamine
Stomach mucosa
Presence of food in the
stomach
Stomach
Stimulates parietal cells
to release HCl
Serotonin
Stomach mucosa
Presence of food in the
stomach
Stomach
Contracts stomach
muscle
Somatostatin
Mucosa of stomach,
especially pyloric
antrum; also
duodenum
Presence of food in the
stomach; sympathetic
axon stimulation
Stomach
Restricts all gastric
secretions, gastric
motility, and emptying
Somatostatin
Mucosa of stomach,
especially pyloric
antrum; also
duodenum
Presence of food in the
stomach; sympathetic
axon stimulation
Pancreas
Restricts pancreatic
secretions
Somatostatin
Mucosa of stomach,
especially pyloric
antrum; also
duodenum
Presence of food in the
stomach; sympathetic
axon stimulation
Small
intestine
Reduces intestinal
absorption by reducing
blood flow
TABLE 23.6
Gastric Secretion
The secretion of gastric juice is controlled by both nerves and hormones. Stimuli in the brain, stomach, and small
intestine activate or inhibit gastric juice production. This is why the three phases of gastric secretion are called the
cephalic, gastric, and intestinal phases (Figure 23.17). However, once gastric secretion begins, all three phases can
occur simultaneously.
23.4 • The Stomach
1019
FIGURE 23.17
The Three Phases of Gastric Secretion
Gastric secretion occurs in three phases: cephalic, gastric, and intestinal.
During each phase, the secretion of gastric juice can be stimulated or inhibited.
The cephalic phase (reflex phase) of gastric secretion, which is relatively brief, takes place before food enters the
stomach. The smell, taste, sight, or thought of food triggers this phase. For example, when you bring a piece of sushi
to your lips, impulses from receptors in your taste buds or the nose are relayed to your brain, which returns signals
that increase gastric secretion to prepare your stomach for digestion. This enhanced secretion is a conditioned
reflex, meaning it occurs only if you like or want a particular food. Depression and loss of appetite can suppress the
cephalic reflex.
The gastric phase of secretion lasts 3 to 4 hours, and is set in motion by local neural and hormonal mechanisms
triggered by the entry of food into the stomach. For example, when your sushi reaches the stomach, it creates
distention that activates the stretch receptors. This stimulates parasympathetic neurons to release acetylcholine,
which then provokes increased secretion of gastric juice. Partially digested proteins, caffeine, and rising pH
stimulate the release of gastrin from enteroendocrine G cells, which in turn induces parietal cells to increase their
production of HCl, which is needed to create an acidic environment for the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin, and
protein digestion. Additionally, the release of gastrin activates vigorous smooth muscle contractions. However, it
should be noted that the stomach does have a natural means of avoiding excessive acid secretion and potential
1020
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
heartburn. Whenever pH levels drop too low, cells in the stomach react by suspending HCl secretion and increasing
mucous secretions.
The intestinal phase of gastric secretion has both excitatory and inhibitory elements. The duodenum has a major
role in regulating the stomach and its emptying. When partially digested food fills the duodenum, intestinal mucosal
cells release a hormone called intestinal (enteric) gastrin, which further excites gastric juice secretion. This
stimulatory activity is brief, however, because when the intestine distends with chyme, the enterogastric reflex
inhibits secretion. One of the effects of this reflex is to close the pyloric sphincter, which blocks additional chyme
from entering the duodenum.
The Mucosal Barrier
The mucosa of the stomach is exposed to the highly corrosive acidity of gastric juice. Gastric enzymes that can
digest protein can also digest the stomach itself. The stomach is protected from self-digestion by the mucosal
barrier. This barrier has several components. First, the stomach wall is covered by a thick coating of bicarbonate-
rich mucus. This mucus forms a physical barrier, and its bicarbonate ions neutralize acid. Second, the epithelial cells
of the stomach's mucosa meet at tight junctions, which block gastric juice from penetrating the underlying tissue
layers. Finally, stem cells located where gastric glands join the gastric pits quickly replace damaged epithelial
mucosal cells, when the epithelial cells are shed. In fact, the surface epithelium of the stomach is completely
replaced every 3 to 6 days.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Ulcers: When the Mucosal Barrier Breaks Down
As effective as the mucosal barrier is, it is not a “fail-safe” mechanism. Sometimes, gastric juice eats away at the
superficial lining of the stomach mucosa, creating erosions, which mostly heal on their own. Deeper and larger
erosions are called ulcers.
Why does the mucosal barrier break down? A number of factors can interfere with its ability to protect the stomach
lining. The majority of all ulcers are caused by either excessive intake of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), including aspirin, or Helicobacter pylori infection.
Antacids help relieve symptoms of ulcers such as “burning” pain and indigestion. When ulcers are caused by NSAID
use, switching to other classes of pain relievers allows healing. When caused by H. pylori infection, antibiotics are
effective.
A potential complication of ulcers is perforation: Perforated ulcers create a hole in the stomach wall, resulting in
peritonitis (inflammation of the peritoneum). These ulcers must be repaired surgically.
Digestive Functions of the Stomach
The stomach participates in virtually all the digestive activities with the exception of ingestion and defecation.
Although almost all absorption takes place in the small intestine, the stomach does absorb some drugs, such as
alcohol and aspirin.
Mechanical Digestion
Within a few moments after food enters your stomach, mixing waves begin to occur at intervals of approximately 20
seconds. A mixing wave is a unique type of peristalsis that mixes and softens the food with gastric juices to create
chyme. The initial mixing waves are relatively gentle, but these are followed by more intense waves, starting at the
body of the stomach and increasing in force as they reach the pylorus. It is fair to say that long before your sushi
exits through the pyloric sphincter, it bears little resemblance to the sushi you ate.
The pylorus, which holds around 30 mL (1 fluid ounce) of chyme, acts as a filter, permitting only liquids and small
food particles to pass through the mostly, but not fully, closed pyloric sphincter. In a process called gastric
emptying, rhythmic mixing waves force about 3 mL of chyme at a time through the pyloric sphincter and into the
duodenum. Release of a greater amount of chyme at one time would overwhelm the capacity of the small intestine
to handle it. The rest of the chyme is pushed back into the body of the stomach, where it continues mixing. This
23.4 • The Stomach
1021
process is repeated when the next mixing waves force more chyme into the duodenum.
Gastric emptying is regulated by both the stomach and the duodenum. The presence of chyme in the duodenum
activates receptors that inhibit gastric secretion. This prevents additional chyme from being released by the
stomach before the duodenum is ready to process it.
Chemical Digestion
The fundus plays an important role, because it stores both undigested food and gases that are released during the
process of chemical digestion. Food may sit in the fundus of the stomach for a while before being mixed with the
chyme. While the food is in the fundus, the digestive activities of salivary amylase continue until the food begins
mixing with the acidic chyme. Ultimately, mixing waves incorporate this food with the chyme, the acidity of which
inactivates salivary amylase and activates lingual lipase. Lingual lipase then begins breaking down triglycerides into
free fatty acids, and mono- and diglycerides.
The breakdown of protein begins in the stomach through the actions of HCl and the enzyme pepsin.
Its numerous digestive functions notwithstanding, there is only one stomach function necessary to life: the
production of intrinsic factor. The intestinal absorption of vitamin B12, which is necessary for both the production of
mature red blood cells and normal neurological functioning, cannot occur without intrinsic factor. People who
undergo total gastrectomy (stomach removal)—for life-threatening stomach cancer, for example—can survive with
minimal digestive dysfunction if they receive vitamin B12 injections.
The contents of the stomach are completely emptied into the duodenum within 2 to 4 hours after you eat a meal.
Different types of food take different amounts of time to process. Foods heavy in carbohydrates empty fastest,
followed by high-protein foods. Meals with a high triglyceride content remain in the stomach the longest. Since
enzymes in the small intestine digest fats slowly, food can stay in the stomach for 6 hours or longer when the
duodenum is processing fatty chyme. However, note that this is still a fraction of the 24 to 72 hours that full
digestion typically takes from start to finish.
23.5 The Small and Large Intestines
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast the location and gross anatomy of the small and large intestines
•
Identify three main adaptations of the small intestine wall that increase its absorptive capacity
•
Describe the mechanical and chemical digestion of chyme upon its release into the small intestine
•
List three features unique to the wall of the large intestine and identify their contributions to its function
•
Identify the beneficial roles of the bacterial flora in digestive system functioning
•
Trace the pathway of food waste from its point of entry into the large intestine through its exit from the body as
feces
The word intestine is derived from a Latin root meaning “internal,” and indeed, the two organs together nearly fill the
interior of the abdominal cavity. In addition, called the small and large bowel, or colloquially the “guts,” they
constitute the greatest mass and length of the alimentary canal and, with the exception of ingestion, perform all
digestive system functions.
The Small Intestine
Chyme released from the stomach enters the small intestine, which is the primary digestive organ in the body. Not
only is this where most digestion occurs, it is also where practically all absorption occurs. The longest part of the
alimentary canal, the small intestine is about 3.05 meters (10 feet) long in a living person (but about twice as long in
a cadaver due to the loss of muscle tone). Since this makes it about five times longer than the large intestine, you
might wonder why it is called “small.” In fact, its name derives from its relatively smaller diameter of only about
2.54 cm (1 in), compared with 7.62 cm (3 in) for the large intestine. As we’ll see shortly, in addition to its length, the
folds and projections of the lining of the small intestine work to give it an enormous surface area, which is
approximately 200 m2, more than 100 times the surface area of your skin. This large surface area is necessary for
complex processes of digestion and absorption that occur within it.
1022
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Structure
The coiled tube of the small intestine is subdivided into three regions. From proximal (at the stomach) to distal,
these are the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum (Figure 23.18).
The shortest region is the 25.4-cm (10-in) duodenum, which begins at the pyloric sphincter. Just past the pyloric
sphincter, it bends posteriorly behind the peritoneum, becoming retroperitoneal, and then makes a C-shaped curve
around the head of the pancreas before ascending anteriorly again to return to the peritoneal cavity and join the
jejunum. The duodenum can therefore be subdivided into four segments: the superior, descending, horizontal, and
ascending duodenum.
Of particular interest is the hepatopancreatic ampulla (ampulla of Vater). Located in the duodenal wall, the ampulla
marks the transition from the anterior portion of the alimentary canal to the mid-region, and is where the bile duct
(through which bile passes from the liver) and the main pancreatic duct (through which pancreatic juice passes
from the pancreas) join. This ampulla opens into the duodenum at a tiny volcano-shaped structure called the major
duodenal papilla. The hepatopancreatic sphincter (sphincter of Oddi) regulates the flow of both bile and
pancreatic juice from the ampulla into the duodenum.
FIGURE 23.18
Small Intestine
The three regions of the small intestine are the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
The jejunum is about 0.9 meters (3 feet) long (in life) and runs from the duodenum to the ileum. Jejunum means
“empty” in Latin and supposedly was so named by the ancient Greeks who noticed it was always empty at death. No
clear demarcation exists between the jejunum and the final segment of the small intestine, the ileum.
The ileum is the longest part of the small intestine, measuring about 1.8 meters (6 feet) in length. It is thicker, more
vascular, and has more developed mucosal folds than the jejunum. The ileum joins the cecum, the first portion of the
large intestine, at the ileocecal sphincter (or valve). The jejunum and ileum are tethered to the posterior abdominal
wall by the mesentery. The large intestine frames these three parts of the small intestine.
Parasympathetic nerve fibers from the vagus nerve and sympathetic nerve fibers from the thoracic splanchnic nerve
provide extrinsic innervation to the small intestine. The superior mesenteric artery is its main arterial supply. Veins
run parallel to the arteries and drain into the superior mesenteric vein. Nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine
is then carried to the liver via the hepatic portal vein.
Histology
The wall of the small intestine is composed of the same four layers typically present in the alimentary system.
However, three features of the mucosa and submucosa are unique. These features, which increase the absorptive
surface area of the small intestine more than 600-fold, include circular folds, villi, and microvilli (Figure 23.19).
These adaptations are most abundant in the proximal two-thirds of the small intestine, where the majority of
absorption occurs.
23.5 • The Small and Large Intestines
1023
FIGURE 23.19
Histology of the Small Intestine
(a) The absorptive surface of the small intestine is vastly enlarged by the presence of
circular folds, villi, and microvilli. (b) Micrograph of the circular folds. (c) Micrograph of the villi. (d) Electron micrograph of the microvilli.
From left to right, LM x 56, LM x 508, EM x 196,000. (credit b-d: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
Circular folds
Also called a plica circulare, a circular fold is a deep ridge in the mucosa and submucosa. Beginning near the
proximal part of the duodenum and ending near the middle of the ileum, these folds facilitate absorption. Their
shape causes the chyme to spiral, rather than move in a straight line, through the small intestine. Spiraling slows the
movement of chyme and provides the time needed for nutrients to be fully absorbed.
Villi
Within the circular folds are small (0.5–1 mm long) hairlike vascularized projections called villi (singular = villus)
that give the mucosa a furry texture. There are about 20 to 40 villi per square millimeter, increasing the surface area
of the epithelium tremendously. The mucosal epithelium, primarily composed of absorptive cells, covers the villi. In
addition to muscle and connective tissue to support its structure, each villus contains a capillary bed composed of
one arteriole and one venule, as well as a lymphatic capillary called a lacteal. The breakdown products of
carbohydrates and proteins (sugars and amino acids) can enter the bloodstream directly, but lipid breakdown
products are absorbed by the lacteals and transported to the bloodstream via the lymphatic system.
Microvilli
As their name suggests, microvilli (singular = microvillus) are much smaller (1 µm) than villi. They are cylindrical
apical surface extensions of the plasma membrane of the mucosa’s epithelial cells, and are supported by
microfilaments within those cells. Although their small size makes it difficult to see each microvillus, their combined
microscopic appearance suggests a mass of bristles, which is termed the brush border. Fixed to the surface of the
microvilli membranes are enzymes that finish digesting carbohydrates and proteins. There are an estimated 200
million microvilli per square millimeter of small intestine, greatly expanding the surface area of the plasma
membrane and thus greatly enhancing absorption.
Intestinal Glands
In addition to the three specialized absorptive features just discussed, the mucosa between the villi is dotted with
deep crevices that each lead into a tubular intestinal gland (crypt of Lieberkühn), which is formed by cells that line
1024
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
the crevices (see Figure 23.19). These produce intestinal juice, a slightly alkaline (pH 7.4 to 7.8) mixture of water
and mucus. Each day, about 0.95 to 1.9 liters (1 to 2 quarts) are secreted in response to the distention of the small
intestine or the irritating effects of chyme on the intestinal mucosa.
The submucosa of the duodenum is the only site of the complex mucus-secreting duodenal glands (Brunner’s
glands), which produce a bicarbonate-rich alkaline mucus that buffers the acidic chyme as it enters from the
stomach.
The roles of the cells in the small intestinal mucosa are detailed in Table 23.7.
Cells of the Small Intestinal Mucosa
Cell type
Location in the
mucosa
Function
Absorptive
Epithelium/intestinal
glands
Digestion and absorption of nutrients in chyme
Goblet
Epithelium/intestinal
glands
Secretion of mucus
Paneth
Intestinal glands
Secretion of the bactericidal enzyme lysozyme; phagocytosis
G cells
Intestinal glands of
duodenum
Secretion of the hormone intestinal gastrin
I cells
Intestinal glands of
duodenum
Secretion of the hormone cholecystokinin, which stimulates release of
pancreatic juices and bile
K cells
Intestinal glands
Secretion of the hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide,
which stimulates the release of insulin
M cells
Intestinal glands of
duodenum and
jejunum
Secretion of the hormone motilin, which accelerates gastric emptying,
stimulates intestinal peristalsis, and stimulates the production of pepsin
S cells
Intestinal glands
Secretion of the hormone secretin
TABLE 23.7
Intestinal MALT
The lamina propria of the small intestine mucosa is studded with quite a bit of MALT. In addition to solitary
lymphatic nodules, aggregations of intestinal MALT, which are typically referred to as Peyer’s patches, are
concentrated in the distal ileum, and serve to keep bacteria from entering the bloodstream. Peyer’s patches are
most prominent in young people and become less distinct as you age, which coincides with the general activity of
our immune system.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/sintestine) that depicts the structure of the small intestine, and, in
particular, the villi. Epithelial cells continue the digestion and absorption of nutrients and transport these nutrients
to the lymphatic and circulatory systems. In the small intestine, the products of food digestion are absorbed by
different structures in the villi. Which structure absorbs and transports fats?
23.5 • The Small and Large Intestines
1025
Mechanical Digestion in the Small Intestine
The movement of intestinal smooth muscles includes both segmentation and a form of peristalsis called migrating
motility complexes. The kind of peristaltic mixing waves seen in the stomach are not observed here.
If you could see into the small intestine when it was going through segmentation, it would look as if the contents
were being shoved incrementally back and forth, as the rings of smooth muscle repeatedly contract and then relax.
Segmentation in the small intestine does not force chyme through the tract. Instead, it combines the chyme with
digestive juices and pushes food particles against the mucosa to be absorbed. The duodenum is where the most
rapid segmentation occurs, at a rate of about 12 times per minute. In the ileum, segmentations are only about eight
times per minute (Figure 23.20).
FIGURE 23.20
Segmentation
Segmentation separates chyme and then pushes it back together, mixing it and providing time for
digestion and absorption.
When most of the chyme has been absorbed, the small intestinal wall becomes less distended. At this point, the
localized segmentation process is replaced by transport movements. The duodenal mucosa secretes the hormone
motilin, which initiates peristalsis in the form of a migrating motility complex. These complexes, which begin in the
duodenum, force chyme through a short section of the small intestine and then stop. The next contraction begins a
little bit farther down than the first, forces chyme a bit farther through the small intestine, then stops. These
complexes move slowly down the small intestine, forcing chyme on the way, taking around 90 to 120 minutes to
finally reach the end of the ileum. At this point, the process is repeated, starting in the duodenum.
The ileocecal valve, a sphincter, is usually in a constricted state, but when motility in the ileum increases, this
sphincter relaxes, allowing food residue to enter the first portion of the large intestine, the cecum. Relaxation of the
ileocecal sphincter is controlled by both nerves and hormones. First, digestive activity in the stomach provokes the
gastroileal reflex, which increases the force of ileal segmentation. Second, the stomach releases the hormone
gastrin, which enhances ileal motility, thus relaxing the ileocecal sphincter. After chyme passes through, backward
pressure helps close the sphincter, preventing backflow into the ileum. Because of this reflex, your lunch is
completely emptied from your stomach and small intestine by the time you eat your dinner. It takes about 3 to 5
hours for all chyme to leave the small intestine.
Chemical Digestion in the Small Intestine
The digestion of proteins and carbohydrates, which partially occurs in the stomach, is completed in the small
intestine with the aid of intestinal and pancreatic juices. Lipids arrive in the intestine largely undigested, so much of
the focus here is on lipid digestion, which is facilitated by bile and the enzyme pancreatic lipase.
Moreover, intestinal juice combines with pancreatic juice to provide a liquid medium that facilitates absorption. The
intestine is also where most water is absorbed, via osmosis. The small intestine’s absorptive cells also synthesize
digestive enzymes and then place them in the plasma membranes of the microvilli. This distinguishes the small
intestine from the stomach; that is, enzymatic digestion occurs not only in the lumen, but also on the luminal
1026
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
surfaces of the mucosal cells.
For optimal chemical digestion, chyme must be delivered from the stomach slowly and in small amounts. This is
because chyme from the stomach is typically hypertonic, and if large quantities were forced all at once into the
small intestine, the resulting osmotic water loss from the blood into the intestinal lumen would result in potentially
life-threatening low blood volume. In addition, continued digestion requires an upward adjustment of the low pH of
stomach chyme, along with rigorous mixing of the chyme with bile and pancreatic juices. Both processes take time,
so the pumping action of the pylorus must be carefully controlled to prevent the duodenum from being
overwhelmed with chyme.
The Large Intestine
The large intestine is the terminal part of the alimentary canal. The primary function of this organ is to finish
absorption of nutrients and water, synthesize certain vitamins, form feces, and eliminate feces from the body.
Structure
The large intestine runs from the appendix to the anus. It frames the small intestine on three sides. Despite its being
about one-half as long as the small intestine, it is called large because it is more than twice the diameter of the
small intestine, about 3 inches.
Subdivisions
The large intestine is subdivided into four main regions: the cecum, the colon, the rectum, and the anus. The
ileocecal valve, located at the opening between the ileum and the large intestine, controls the flow of chyme from
the small intestine to the large intestine.
Cecum
The first part of the large intestine is the cecum, a sac-like structure that is suspended inferior to the ileocecal valve.
It is about 6 cm (2.4 in) long, receives the contents of the ileum, and continues the absorption of water and salts.
The appendix (or vermiform appendix) is a winding tube that attaches to the cecum. Although the 7.6-cm (3-in)
long appendix contains lymphoid tissue, suggesting an immunologic function, this organ is generally considered
vestigial. However, at least one recent report postulates a survival advantage conferred by the appendix: In
diarrheal illness, the appendix may serve as a bacterial reservoir to repopulate the enteric bacteria for those
surviving the initial phases of the illness. Moreover, its twisted anatomy provides a haven for the accumulation and
multiplication of enteric bacteria. The mesoappendix, the mesentery of the appendix, tethers it to the mesentery of
the ileum.
Disorders of the...
Small Intestine: Lactose Intolerance
Lactose intolerance is a condition characterized by indigestion caused by dairy products. It occurs when the
absorptive cells of the small intestine do not produce enough lactase, the enzyme that digests the milk sugar
lactose. In most mammals, lactose intolerance increases with age. In contrast, some human populations are
able to maintain the ability to produce lactase as adults.
In people with lactose intolerance, the lactose in chyme is not digested. Bacteria in the large intestine ferment
the undigested lactose, a process that produces gas. In addition to gas, symptoms include abdominal cramps,
bloating, and diarrhea. Symptom severity ranges from mild discomfort to severe pain; however, symptoms
resolve once the lactose is eliminated in feces.
The hydrogen breath test is used to help diagnose lactose intolerance. Lactose-tolerant people have very little
hydrogen in their breath. Those with lactose intolerance exhale hydrogen, which is one of the gases produced by
the bacterial fermentation of lactose in the colon. After the hydrogen is absorbed from the intestine, it is
transported through blood vessels into the lungs. There are a number of lactose-free dairy products available in
grocery stores. In addition, dietary supplements are available. Taken with food, they provide lactase to help
digest lactose.
23.5 • The Small and Large Intestines
1027
Colon
The cecum blends seamlessly with the colon. Upon entering the colon, the food residue first travels up the
ascending colon on the right side of the abdomen. At the inferior surface of the liver, the colon bends to form the
right colic flexure (hepatic flexure) and becomes the transverse colon. The region defined as hindgut begins with
the last third of the transverse colon and continues on. Food residue passing through the transverse colon travels
across to the left side of the abdomen, where the colon angles sharply immediately inferior to the spleen, at the left
colic flexure (splenic flexure). From there, food residue passes through the descending colon, which runs down the
left side of the posterior abdominal wall. After entering the pelvis inferiorly, it becomes the s-shaped sigmoid colon,
which extends medially to the midline (Figure 23.21). The ascending and descending colon, and the rectum
(discussed next) are located in the retroperitoneum. The transverse and sigmoid colon are tethered to the posterior
abdominal wall by the mesocolon.
FIGURE 23.21
Large Intestine
The large intestine includes the cecum, colon, and rectum.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Colorectal Cancer
Each year, approximately 140,000 Americans are diagnosed with colorectal cancer, and another 49,000 die from it,
making it one of the most deadly malignancies. People with a family history of colorectal cancer are at increased
risk. Smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, and a diet high in animal fat and protein also increase the risk.
Despite popular opinion to the contrary, studies support the conclusion that dietary fiber and calcium do not reduce
the risk of colorectal cancer.
Colorectal cancer may be signaled by constipation or diarrhea, cramping, abdominal pain, and rectal bleeding.
Bleeding from the rectum may be either obvious or occult (hidden in feces). Since most colon cancers arise from
benign mucosal growths called polyps, cancer prevention is focused on identifying these polyps. The colonoscopy is
both diagnostic and therapeutic. Colonoscopy not only allows identification of precancerous polyps, the procedure
also enables them to be removed before they become malignant. Screening for fecal occult blood tests and
colonoscopy is recommended for those over 50 years of age.
Rectum
Food residue leaving the sigmoid colon enters the rectum in the pelvis, near the third sacral vertebra. The final 20.3
cm (8 in) of the alimentary canal, the rectum extends anterior to the sacrum and coccyx. Even though rectum is
Latin for “straight,” this structure follows the curved contour of the sacrum and has three lateral bends that create a
trio of internal transverse folds called the rectal valves. These valves help separate the feces from gas to prevent
the simultaneous passage of feces and gas.
Anal Canal
Finally, food residue reaches the last part of the large intestine, the anal canal, which is located in the perineum,
completely outside of the abdominopelvic cavity. This 3.8–5 cm (1.5–2 in) long structure opens to the exterior of the
1028
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
body at the anus. The anal canal includes two sphincters. The internal anal sphincter is made of smooth muscle,
and its contractions are involuntary. The external anal sphincter is made of skeletal muscle, which is under
voluntary control. Except when defecating, both usually remain closed.
Histology
There are several notable differences between the walls of the large and small intestines (Figure 23.22). For
example, few enzyme-secreting cells are found in the wall of the large intestine, and there are no circular folds or
villi. Other than in the anal canal, the mucosa of the colon is simple columnar epithelium made mostly of
enterocytes (absorptive cells) and goblet cells. In addition, the wall of the large intestine has far more intestinal
glands, which contain a vast population of enterocytes and goblet cells. These goblet cells secrete mucus that eases
the movement of feces and protects the intestine from the effects of the acids and gases produced by enteric
bacteria. The enterocytes absorb water and salts as well as vitamins produced by your intestinal bacteria.
FIGURE 23.22
Histology of the large Intestine
(a) The histologies of the large intestine and small intestine (not shown) are adapted for
the digestive functions of each organ. (b) This micrograph shows the colon’s simple columnar epithelium and goblet cells. LM x 464. (credit
b: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Anatomy
Three features are unique to the large intestine: teniae coli, haustra, and epiploic appendages (Figure 23.23). The
teniae coli are three bands of smooth muscle that make up the longitudinal muscle layer of the muscularis of the
large intestine, except at its terminal end. Tonic contractions of the teniae coli bunch up the colon into a succession
of pouches called haustra (singular = haustrum), which are responsible for the wrinkled appearance of the colon.
Attached to the teniae coli are small, fat-filled sacs of visceral peritoneum called epiploic appendages. The purpose
of these is unknown. Although the rectum and anal canal have neither teniae coli nor haustra, they do have well-
developed layers of muscularis that create the strong contractions needed for defecation.
23.5 • The Small and Large Intestines
1029
FIGURE 23.23
Teniae Coli, Haustra, and Epiploic Appendages
The stratified squamous epithelial mucosa of the anal canal connects to the skin on the outside of the anus. This
mucosa varies considerably from that of the rest of the colon to accommodate the high level of abrasion as feces
pass through. The anal canal’s mucous membrane is organized into longitudinal folds, each called an anal column,
which house a grid of arteries and veins. Two superficial venous plexuses are found in the anal canal: one within the
anal columns and one at the anus.
Depressions between the anal columns, each called an anal sinus, secrete mucus that facilitates defecation. The
pectinate line (or dentate line) is a horizontal, jagged band that runs circumferentially just below the level of the
anal sinuses, and represents the junction between the hindgut and external skin. The mucosa above this line is fairly
insensitive, whereas the area below is very sensitive. The resulting difference in pain threshold is due to the fact that
the upper region is innervated by visceral sensory fibers, and the lower region is innervated by somatic sensory
fibers.
Bacterial Flora
Most bacteria that enter the alimentary canal are killed by lysozyme, defensins, HCl, or protein-digesting enzymes.
However, trillions of bacteria live within the large intestine and are referred to as the bacterial flora. Most of the
more than 700 species of these bacteria are nonpathogenic commensal organisms that cause no harm as long as
they stay in the gut lumen. In fact, many facilitate chemical digestion and absorption, and some synthesize certain
vitamins, mainly biotin, pantothenic acid, and vitamin K. Some are linked to increased immune response. A refined
system prevents these bacteria from crossing the mucosal barrier. First, peptidoglycan, a component of bacterial
cell walls, activates the release of chemicals by the mucosa’s epithelial cells, which draft immune cells, especially
dendritic cells, into the mucosa. Dendritic cells open the tight junctions between epithelial cells and extend probes
into the lumen to evaluate the microbial antigens. The dendritic cells with antigens then travel to neighboring
lymphoid follicles in the mucosa where T cells inspect for antigens. This process triggers an IgA-mediated response,
if warranted, in the lumen that blocks the commensal organisms from infiltrating the mucosa and setting off a far
greater, widespread systematic reaction.
Digestive Functions of the Large Intestine
The residue of chyme that enters the large intestine contains few nutrients except water, which is reabsorbed as the
residue lingers in the large intestine, typically for 12 to 24 hours. Thus, it may not surprise you that the large
intestine can be completely removed without significantly affecting digestive functioning. For example, in severe
cases of inflammatory bowel disease, the large intestine can be removed by a procedure known as a colectomy.
1030
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Often, a new fecal pouch can be crafted from the small intestine and sutured to the anus, but if not, an ileostomy
can be created by bringing the distal ileum through the abdominal wall, allowing the watery chyme to be collected in
a bag-like adhesive appliance.
Mechanical Digestion
In the large intestine, mechanical digestion begins when chyme moves from the ileum into the cecum, an activity
regulated by the ileocecal sphincter. Right after you eat, peristalsis in the ileum forces chyme into the cecum. When
the cecum is distended with chyme, contractions of the ileocecal sphincter strengthen. Once chyme enters the
cecum, colon movements begin.
Mechanical digestion in the large intestine includes a combination of three types of movements. The presence of
food residues in the colon stimulates a slow-moving haustral contraction. This type of movement involves sluggish
segmentation, primarily in the transverse and descending colons. When a haustrum is distended with chyme, its
muscle contracts, pushing the residue into the next haustrum. These contractions occur about every 30 minutes,
and each last about 1 minute. These movements also mix the food residue, which helps the large intestine absorb
water. The second type of movement is peristalsis, which, in the large intestine, is slower than in the more proximal
portions of the alimentary canal. The third type is a mass movement. These strong waves start midway through the
transverse colon and quickly force the contents toward the rectum. Mass movements usually occur three or four
times per day, either while you eat or immediately afterward. Distension in the stomach and the breakdown
products of digestion in the small intestine provoke the gastrocolic reflex, which increases motility, including mass
movements, in the colon. Fiber in the diet both softens the stool and increases the power of colonic contractions,
optimizing the activities of the colon.
Chemical Digestion
Although the glands of the large intestine secrete mucus, they do not secrete digestive enzymes. Therefore,
chemical digestion in the large intestine occurs exclusively because of bacteria in the lumen of the colon. Through
the process of saccharolytic fermentation, bacteria break down some of the remaining carbohydrates. This results
in the discharge of hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and methane gases that create flatus (gas) in the colon; flatulence is
excessive flatus. Each day, up to 1500 mL of flatus is produced in the colon. More is produced when you eat foods
such as beans, which are rich in otherwise indigestible sugars and complex carbohydrates like soluble dietary fiber.
Absorption, Feces Formation, and Defecation
The small intestine absorbs about 90 percent of the water you ingest (either as liquid or within solid food). The large
intestine absorbs most of the remaining water, a process that converts the liquid chyme residue into semisolid feces
(“stool”). Feces is composed of undigested food residues, unabsorbed digested substances, millions of bacteria, old
epithelial cells from the GI mucosa, inorganic salts, and enough water to let it pass smoothly out of the body. Of
every 500 mL (17 ounces) of food residue that enters the cecum each day, about 150 mL (5 ounces) become feces.
Feces are eliminated through contractions of the rectal muscles. You help this process by a voluntary procedure
called Valsalva’s maneuver, in which you increase intra-abdominal pressure by contracting your diaphragm and
abdominal wall muscles, and closing your glottis.
The process of defecation begins when mass movements force feces from the colon into the rectum, stretching the
rectal wall and provoking the defecation reflex, which eliminates feces from the rectum. This parasympathetic reflex
is mediated by the spinal cord. It contracts the sigmoid colon and rectum, relaxes the internal anal sphincter, and
initially contracts the external anal sphincter. The presence of feces in the anal canal sends a signal to the brain,
which gives you the choice of voluntarily opening the external anal sphincter (defecating) or keeping it temporarily
closed. If you decide to delay defecation, it takes a few seconds for the reflex contractions to stop and the rectal
walls to relax. The next mass movement will trigger additional defecation reflexes until you defecate.
If defecation is delayed for an extended time, additional water is absorbed, making the feces firmer and potentially
leading to constipation. On the other hand, if the waste matter moves too quickly through the intestines, not enough
water is absorbed, and diarrhea can result. This can be caused by the ingestion of foodborne pathogens. In general,
diet, health, and stress determine the frequency of bowel movements. The number of bowel movements varies
greatly between individuals, ranging from two or three per day to three or four per week.
23.5 • The Small and Large Intestines
1031
INTERACTIVE LINK
By watching this animation (http://openstax.org/l/foodgroups) you will see that for the various food
groups—proteins, fats, and carbohydrates—digestion begins in different parts of the digestion system, though all end
in the same place. Of the three major food classes (carbohydrates, fats, and proteins), which is digested in the
mouth, the stomach, and the small intestine?
23.6 Accessory Organs in Digestion: The Liver, Pancreas, and Gallbladder
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
State the main digestive roles of the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder
•
Identify three main features of liver histology that are critical to its function
•
Discuss the composition and function of bile
•
Identify the major types of enzymes and buffers present in pancreatic juice
Chemical digestion in the small intestine relies on the activities of three accessory digestive organs: the liver,
pancreas, and gallbladder (Figure 23.24). The digestive role of the liver is to produce bile and export it to the
duodenum. The gallbladder primarily stores, concentrates, and releases bile. The pancreas produces pancreatic
juice, which contains digestive enzymes and bicarbonate ions, and delivers it to the duodenum.
FIGURE 23.24
Accessory Organs
The liver, pancreas, and gallbladder are considered accessory digestive organs, but their roles in the
digestive system are vital.
The Liver
The liver is the largest gland in the body, weighing about three pounds in an adult. It is also one of the most
1032
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
important organs. In addition to being an accessory digestive organ, it plays a number of roles in metabolism and
regulation. The liver lies inferior to the diaphragm in the right upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity and receives
protection from the surrounding ribs.
The liver is divided into two primary lobes: a large right lobe and a much smaller left lobe. In the right lobe, some
anatomists also identify an inferior quadrate lobe and a posterior caudate lobe, which are defined by internal
features. The liver is connected to the abdominal wall and diaphragm by five peritoneal folds referred to as
ligaments. These are the falciform ligament, the coronary ligament, two lateral ligaments, and the ligamentum teres
hepatis. The falciform ligament and ligamentum teres hepatis are actually remnants of the umbilical vein, and
separate the right and left lobes anteriorly. The lesser omentum tethers the liver to the lesser curvature of the
stomach.
The porta hepatis (“gate to the liver”) is where the hepatic artery and hepatic portal vein enter the liver. These
two vessels, along with the common hepatic duct, run behind the lateral border of the lesser omentum on the way to
their destinations. As shown in Figure 23.25, the hepatic artery delivers oxygenated blood from the heart to the liver.
The hepatic portal vein delivers partially deoxygenated blood containing nutrients absorbed from the small intestine
and actually supplies more oxygen to the liver than do the much smaller hepatic arteries. In addition to nutrients,
drugs and toxins are also absorbed. After processing the bloodborne nutrients and toxins, the liver releases
nutrients needed by other cells back into the blood, which drains into the central vein and then through the hepatic
vein to the inferior vena cava. With this hepatic portal circulation, all blood from the alimentary canal passes through
the liver. This largely explains why the liver is the most common site for the metastasis of cancers that originate in
the alimentary canal.
FIGURE 23.25
Microscopic Anatomy of the Liver
The liver receives oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery and nutrient-rich
deoxygenated blood from the hepatic portal vein.
23.6 • Accessory Organs in Digestion: The Liver, Pancreas, and Gallbladder
1033
Histology
The liver has three main components: hepatocytes, bile canaliculi, and hepatic sinusoids. A hepatocyte is the liver’s
main cell type, accounting for around 80 percent of the liver's volume. These cells play a role in a wide variety of
secretory, metabolic, and endocrine functions. Plates of hepatocytes called hepatic laminae radiate outward from
the portal vein in each hepatic lobule.
Between adjacent hepatocytes, grooves in the cell membranes provide room for each bile canaliculus (plural =
canaliculi). These small ducts accumulate the bile produced by hepatocytes. From here, bile flows first into bile
ductules and then into bile ducts. The bile ducts unite to form the larger right and left hepatic ducts, which
themselves merge and exit the liver as the common hepatic duct. This duct then joins with the cystic duct from the
gallbladder, forming the common bile duct through which bile flows into the small intestine.
A hepatic sinusoid is an open, porous blood space formed by fenestrated capillaries from nutrient-rich hepatic
portal veins and oxygen-rich hepatic arteries. Hepatocytes are tightly packed around the fenestrated endothelium of
these spaces, giving them easy access to the blood. From their central position, hepatocytes process the nutrients,
toxins, and waste materials carried by the blood. Materials such as bilirubin are processed and excreted into the bile
canaliculi. Other materials including proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates are processed and secreted into the
sinusoids or just stored in the cells until called upon. The hepatic sinusoids combine and send blood to a central
vein. Blood then flows through a hepatic vein into the inferior vena cava. This means that blood and bile flow in
opposite directions. The hepatic sinusoids also contain star-shaped reticuloendothelial cells (Kupffer cells),
phagocytes that remove dead red and white blood cells, bacteria, and other foreign material that enter the
sinusoids. The portal triad is a distinctive arrangement around the perimeter of hepatic lobules, consisting of three
basic structures: a bile duct, a hepatic artery branch, and a hepatic portal vein branch.
Bile
Recall that lipids are hydrophobic, that is, they do not dissolve in water. Thus, before they can be digested in the
watery environment of the small intestine, large lipid globules must be broken down into smaller lipid globules, a
process called emulsification. Bile is a mixture secreted by the liver to accomplish the emulsification of lipids in the
small intestine.
Hepatocytes secrete about one liter of bile each day. A yellow-brown or yellow-green alkaline solution (pH 7.6 to
8.6), bile is a mixture of water, bile salts, bile pigments, phospholipids (such as lecithin), electrolytes, cholesterol,
and triglycerides. The components most critical to emulsification are bile salts and phospholipids, which have a
nonpolar (hydrophobic) region as well as a polar (hydrophilic) region. The hydrophobic region interacts with the
large lipid molecules, whereas the hydrophilic region interacts with the watery chyme in the intestine. This results in
the large lipid globules being pulled apart into many tiny lipid fragments of about 1 µm in diameter. This change
dramatically increases the surface area available for lipid-digesting enzyme activity. This is the same way dish soap
works on fats mixed with water.
Bile salts act as emulsifying agents, so they are also important for the absorption of digested lipids. While most
constituents of bile are eliminated in feces, bile salts are reclaimed by the enterohepatic circulation. Once bile
salts reach the ileum, they are absorbed and returned to the liver in the hepatic portal blood. The hepatocytes then
excrete the bile salts into newly formed bile. Thus, this precious resource is recycled.
Bilirubin, the main bile pigment, is a waste product produced when the spleen removes old or damaged red blood
cells from the circulation. These breakdown products, including proteins, iron, and toxic bilirubin, are transported to
the liver via the splenic vein of the hepatic portal system. In the liver, proteins and iron are recycled, whereas
bilirubin is excreted in the bile. It accounts for the green color of bile. Bilirubin is eventually transformed by
intestinal bacteria into stercobilin, a brown pigment that gives your stool its characteristic color! In some disease
states, bile does not enter the intestine, resulting in white (‘acholic’) stool with a high fat content, since virtually no
fats are broken down or absorbed.
Hepatocytes work non-stop, but bile production increases when fatty chyme enters the duodenum and stimulates
the secretion of the gut hormone secretin. Between meals, bile is produced but conserved. The valve-like
hepatopancreatic ampulla closes, allowing bile to divert to the gallbladder, where it is concentrated and stored until
the next meal.
1034
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/liver) to see the structure of the liver and how this structure supports the
functions of the liver, including the processing of nutrients, toxins, and wastes. At rest, about 1500 mL of blood per
minute flow through the liver. What percentage of this blood flow comes from the hepatic portal system?
The Pancreas
The soft, oblong, glandular pancreas lies transversely in the retroperitoneum behind the stomach. Its head is
nestled into the “c-shaped” curvature of the duodenum with the body extending to the left about 15.2 cm (6 in) and
ending as a tapering tail in the hilum of the spleen. It is a curious mix of exocrine (secreting digestive enzymes) and
endocrine (releasing hormones into the blood) functions (Figure 23.26).
FIGURE 23.26
Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
The pancreas has a head, a body, and a tail. It delivers pancreatic juice to the
duodenum through the pancreatic duct.
The exocrine part of the pancreas arises as little grape-like cell clusters, each called an acinus (plural = acini),
located at the terminal ends of pancreatic ducts. These acinar cells secrete enzyme-rich pancreatic juice into tiny
merging ducts that form two dominant ducts. The larger duct fuses with the common bile duct (carrying bile from
the liver and gallbladder) just before entering the duodenum via a common opening (the hepatopancreatic ampulla).
The smooth muscle sphincter of the hepatopancreatic ampulla controls the release of pancreatic juice and bile into
the small intestine. The second and smaller pancreatic duct, the accessory duct (duct of Santorini), runs from the
pancreas directly into the duodenum, approximately 1 inch above the hepatopancreatic ampulla. When present, it is
a persistent remnant of pancreatic development.
Scattered through the sea of exocrine acini are small islands of endocrine cells, the islets of Langerhans. These vital
cells produce the hormones pancreatic polypeptide, insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin.
23.6 • Accessory Organs in Digestion: The Liver, Pancreas, and Gallbladder
1035
Pancreatic Juice
The pancreas produces over a liter of pancreatic juice each day. Unlike bile, it is clear and composed mostly of water
along with some salts, sodium bicarbonate, and several digestive enzymes. Sodium bicarbonate is responsible for
the slight alkalinity of pancreatic juice (pH 7.1 to 8.2), which serves to buffer the acidic gastric juice in chyme,
inactivate pepsin from the stomach, and create an optimal environment for the activity of pH-sensitive digestive
enzymes in the small intestine. Pancreatic enzymes are active in the digestion of sugars, proteins, and fats.
The pancreas produces protein-digesting enzymes in their inactive forms. These enzymes are activated in the
duodenum. If produced in an active form, they would digest the pancreas (which is exactly what occurs in the
disease, pancreatitis). The intestinal brush border enzyme enteropeptidase stimulates the activation of trypsin
from trypsinogen of the pancreas, which in turn changes the pancreatic enzymes procarboxypeptidase and
chymotrypsinogen into their active forms, carboxypeptidase and chymotrypsin.
The enzymes that digest starch (amylase), fat (lipase), and nucleic acids (nuclease) are secreted in their active
forms, since they do not attack the pancreas as do the protein-digesting enzymes.
Pancreatic Secretion
Regulation of pancreatic secretion is the job of hormones and the parasympathetic nervous system. The entry of
acidic chyme into the duodenum stimulates the release of secretin, which in turn causes the duct cells to release
bicarbonate-rich pancreatic juice. The presence of proteins and fats in the duodenum stimulates the secretion of
CCK, which then stimulates the acini to secrete enzyme-rich pancreatic juice and enhances the activity of secretin.
Parasympathetic regulation occurs mainly during the cephalic and gastric phases of gastric secretion, when vagal
stimulation prompts the secretion of pancreatic juice.
Usually, the pancreas secretes just enough bicarbonate to counterbalance the amount of HCl produced in the
stomach. Hydrogen ions enter the blood when bicarbonate is secreted by the pancreas. Thus, the acidic blood
draining from the pancreas neutralizes the alkaline blood draining from the stomach, maintaining the pH of the
venous blood that flows to the liver.
The Gallbladder
The gallbladder is 8–10 cm (~3–4 in) long and is nested in a shallow area on the posterior aspect of the right lobe of
the liver. This muscular sac stores, concentrates, and, when stimulated, propels the bile into the duodenum via the
common bile duct. It is divided into three regions. The fundus is the widest portion and tapers medially into the
body, which in turn narrows to become the neck. The neck angles slightly superiorly as it approaches the hepatic
duct. The cystic duct is 1–2 cm (less than 1 in) long and turns inferiorly as it bridges the neck and hepatic duct.
The simple columnar epithelium of the gallbladder mucosa is organized in rugae, similar to those of the stomach.
There is no submucosa in the gallbladder wall. The wall’s middle, muscular coat is made of smooth muscle fibers.
When these fibers contract, the gallbladder’s contents are ejected through the cystic duct and into the bile duct
(Figure 23.27). Visceral peritoneum reflected from the liver capsule holds the gallbladder against the liver and forms
the outer coat of the gallbladder. The gallbladder's mucosa absorbs water and ions from bile, concentrating it by up
to 10-fold.
1036
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 23.27
Gallbladder
The gallbladder stores and concentrates bile, and releases it into the two-way cystic duct when it is needed
by the small intestine.
23.7 Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the locations and primary secretions involved in the chemical digestion of carbohydrates, proteins,
lipids, and nucleic acids
•
Compare and contrast absorption of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nutrients
As you have learned, the process of mechanical digestion is relatively simple. It involves the physical breakdown of
food but does not alter its chemical makeup. Chemical digestion, on the other hand, is a complex process that
reduces food into its chemical building blocks, which are then absorbed to nourish the cells of the body (Figure
23.28). In this section, you will look more closely at the processes of chemical digestion and absorption.
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1037
FIGURE 23.28
Digestion and Absorption
Digestion begins in the mouth and continues as food travels through the small intestine.
Most absorption occurs in the small intestine.
Chemical Digestion
Large food molecules (for example, proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and starches) must be broken down into subunits
that are small enough to be absorbed by the lining of the alimentary canal. This is accomplished by enzymes
through hydrolysis. The many enzymes involved in chemical digestion are summarized in Table 23.8.
The Digestive Enzymes
Enzyme
Category
Enzyme Name
Source
Substrate
Product
Salivary
Enzymes
Lingual lipase
Lingual
glands
Triglycerides
Free fatty acids, and mono- and
diglycerides
Salivary
Enzymes
Salivary
amylase
Salivary
glands
Polysaccharides
Disaccharides and
trisaccharides
Gastric
enzymes
Gastric lipase
Chief cells
Triglycerides
Fatty acids and
monoacylglycerides
Gastric
enzymes
Pepsin*
Chief cells
Proteins
Peptides
TABLE 23.8 *These enzymes have been activated by other substances.
1038
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Enzyme
Category
Enzyme Name
Source
Substrate
Product
Brush
border
enzymes
α-Dextrinase
Small
intestine
α-Dextrins
Glucose
Brush
border
enzymes
Enteropeptidase
Small
intestine
Trypsinogen
Trypsin
Brush
border
enzymes
Lactase
Small
intestine
Lactose
Glucose and galactose
Brush
border
enzymes
Maltase
Small
intestine
Maltose
Glucose
Brush
border
enzymes
Nucleosidases
and
phosphatases
Small
intestine
Nucleotides
Phosphates, nitrogenous bases,
and pentoses
Brush
border
enzymes
Peptidases
Small
intestine
•
Aminopeptidase: amino
acids at the amino end of
peptides
•
Dipeptidase: dipeptides
•
Aminopeptidase: amino
acids and peptides
•
Dipeptidase: amino acids
Brush
border
enzymes
Sucrase
Small
intestine
Sucrose
Glucose and fructose
Pancreatic
enzymes
Carboxy-
peptidase*
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Amino acids at the carboxyl
end of peptides
Amino acids and peptides
Pancreatic
enzymes
Chymotrypsin*
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Proteins
Peptides
Pancreatic
enzymes
Elastase*
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Proteins
Peptides
Pancreatic
enzymes
Nucleases
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
•
Ribonuclease: ribonucleic
acids
•
Deoxyribonuclease:
deoxyribonucleic acids
Nucleotides
TABLE 23.8 *These enzymes have been activated by other substances.
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1039
Enzyme
Category
Enzyme Name
Source
Substrate
Product
Pancreatic
enzymes
Pancreatic
amylase
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Polysaccharides (starches)
α-Dextrins, disaccharides
(maltose), trisaccharides
(maltotriose)
Pancreatic
enzymes
Pancreatic
lipase
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Triglycerides that have been
emulsified by bile salts
Fatty acids and
monoacylglycerides
Pancreatic
enzymes
Trypsin*
Pancreatic
acinar
cells
Proteins
Peptides
TABLE 23.8 *These enzymes have been activated by other substances.
Carbohydrate Digestion
The average American diet is about 50 percent carbohydrates, which may be classified according to the number of
monomers they contain of simple sugars (monosaccharides and disaccharides) and/or complex sugars
(polysaccharides). Glucose, galactose, and fructose are the three monosaccharides that are commonly consumed
and are readily absorbed. Your digestive system is also able to break down the disaccharide sucrose (regular table
sugar: glucose + fructose), lactose (milk sugar: glucose + galactose), and maltose (grain sugar: glucose + glucose),
and the polysaccharides glycogen and starch (chains of monosaccharides). Your bodies do not produce enzymes
that can break down most fibrous polysaccharides, such as cellulose. While indigestible polysaccharides do not
provide any nutritional value, they do provide dietary fiber, which helps propel food through the alimentary canal.
The chemical digestion of starches begins in the mouth and has been reviewed above.
In the small intestine, pancreatic amylase does the ‘heavy lifting’ for starch and carbohydrate digestion (Figure
23.29). After amylases break down starch into smaller fragments, the brush border enzyme α-dextrinase starts
working on α-dextrin, breaking off one glucose unit at a time. Three brush border enzymes hydrolyze sucrose,
lactose, and maltose into monosaccharides. Sucrase splits sucrose into one molecule of fructose and one molecule
of glucose; maltase breaks down maltose and maltotriose into two and three glucose molecules, respectively; and
lactase breaks down lactose into one molecule of glucose and one molecule of galactose. Insufficient lactase can
lead to lactose intolerance.
FIGURE 23.29
Carbohydrate Digestion Flow Chart
Carbohydrates are broken down into their monomers in a series of steps.
Protein Digestion
Proteins are polymers composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds to form long chains. Digestion reduces
them to their constituent amino acids. You usually consume about 15 to 20 percent of your total calorie intake as
protein.
1040
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
The digestion of protein starts in the stomach, where HCl and pepsin break proteins into smaller polypeptides,
which then travel to the small intestine (Figure 23.30). Chemical digestion in the small intestine is continued by
pancreatic enzymes, including chymotrypsin and trypsin, each of which act on specific bonds in amino acid
sequences. At the same time, the cells of the brush border secrete enzymes such as aminopeptidase and
dipeptidase, which further break down peptide chains. This results in molecules small enough to enter the
bloodstream (Figure 23.31).
FIGURE 23.30
Digestion of Protein
The digestion of protein begins in the stomach and is completed in the small intestine.
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1041
FIGURE 23.31
Digestion of Protein Flow Chart
Proteins are successively broken down into their amino acid components.
Lipid Digestion
A healthy diet limits lipid intake to 35 percent of total calorie intake. The most common dietary lipids are
triglycerides, which are made up of a glycerol molecule bound to three fatty acid chains. Small amounts of dietary
cholesterol and phospholipids are also consumed.
The three lipases responsible for lipid digestion are lingual lipase, gastric lipase, and pancreatic lipase. However,
because the pancreas is the only consequential source of lipase, virtually all lipid digestion occurs in the small
intestine. Pancreatic lipase breaks down each triglyceride into two free fatty acids and a monoglyceride. The fatty
acids include both short-chain (less than 10 to 12 carbons) and long-chain fatty acids.
Nucleic Acid Digestion
The nucleic acids DNA and RNA are found in most of the foods you eat. Two types of pancreatic nuclease are
responsible for their digestion: deoxyribonuclease, which digests DNA, and ribonuclease, which digests RNA. The
nucleotides produced by this digestion are further broken down by two intestinal brush border enzymes
(nucleosidase and phosphatase) into pentoses, phosphates, and nitrogenous bases, which can be absorbed
through the alimentary canal wall. The large food molecules that must be broken down into subunits are
summarized Table 23.9
Absorbable Food Substances
Source
Substance
Carbohydrates
Monosaccharides: glucose, galactose, and fructose
Proteins
Single amino acids, dipeptides, and tripeptides
TABLE 23.9
1042
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Source
Substance
Triglycerides
Monoacylglycerides, glycerol, and free fatty acids
Nucleic acids
Pentose sugars, phosphates, and nitrogenous bases
TABLE 23.9
Absorption
The mechanical and digestive processes have one goal: to convert food into molecules small enough to be absorbed
by the epithelial cells of the intestinal villi. The absorptive capacity of the alimentary canal is almost endless. Each
day, the alimentary canal processes up to 10 liters of food, liquids, and GI secretions, yet less than one liter enters
the large intestine. Almost all ingested food, 80 percent of electrolytes, and 90 percent of water are absorbed in the
small intestine. Although the entire small intestine is involved in the absorption of water and lipids, most absorption
of carbohydrates and proteins occurs in the jejunum. Notably, bile salts and vitamin B12 are absorbed in the terminal
ileum. By the time chyme passes from the ileum into the large intestine, it is essentially indigestible food residue
(mainly plant fibers like cellulose), some water, and millions of bacteria (Figure 23.32).
FIGURE 23.32
Digestive Secretions and Absorption of Water
Absorption is a complex process, in which nutrients from digested food
are harvested.
Absorption can occur through five mechanisms: (1) active transport, (2) passive diffusion, (3) facilitated diffusion,
(4) co-transport (or secondary active transport), and (5) endocytosis. As you will recall from Chapter 3, active
transport refers to the movement of a substance across a cell membrane going from an area of lower concentration
to an area of higher concentration (up the concentration gradient). In this type of transport, proteins within the cell
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1043
membrane act as “pumps,” using cellular energy (ATP) to move the substance. Passive diffusion refers to the
movement of substances from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration, while facilitated
diffusion refers to the movement of substances from an area of higher to an area of lower concentration using a
carrier protein in the cell membrane. Co-transport uses the movement of one molecule through the membrane from
higher to lower concentration to power the movement of another from lower to higher. Finally, endocytosis is a
transportation process in which the cell membrane engulfs material. It requires energy, generally in the form of ATP.
Because the cell’s plasma membrane is made up of hydrophobic phospholipids, water-soluble nutrients must use
transport molecules embedded in the membrane to enter cells. Moreover, substances cannot pass between the
epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa because these cells are bound together by tight junctions. Thus, substances
can only enter blood capillaries by passing through the apical surfaces of epithelial cells and into the interstitial
fluid. Water-soluble nutrients enter the capillary blood in the villi and travel to the liver via the hepatic portal vein.
In contrast to the water-soluble nutrients, lipid-soluble nutrients can diffuse through the plasma membrane. Once
inside the cell, they are packaged for transport via the base of the cell and then enter the lacteals of the villi to be
transported by lymphatic vessels to the systemic circulation via the thoracic duct. The absorption of most nutrients
through the mucosa of the intestinal villi requires active transport fueled by ATP. The routes of absorption for each
food category are summarized in Table 23.10.
Absorption in the Alimentary Canal
Food
Breakdown
products
Absorption mechanism
Entry to
bloodstream
Destination
Carbohydrates
Glucose
Co-transport with sodium ions
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
Carbohydrates
Galactose
Co-transport with sodium ions
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
Carbohydrates
Fructose
Facilitated diffusion
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
Protein
Amino acids
Co-transport with sodium ions
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
Lipids
Long-chain fatty
acids
Diffusion into intestinal cells,
where they are combined with
proteins to create chylomicrons
Lacteals of
villi
Systemic
circulation via
lymph entering
thoracic duct
Lipids
Monoacylglycerides
Diffusion into intestinal cells,
where they are combined with
proteins to create chylomicrons
Lacteals of
villi
Systemic
circulation via
lymph entering
thoracic duct
Lipids
Short-chain fatty
acids
Simple diffusion
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
TABLE 23.10
1044
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Food
Breakdown
products
Absorption mechanism
Entry to
bloodstream
Destination
Lipids
Glycerol
Simple diffusion
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acid
digestion products
Active transport via membrane
carriers
Capillary
blood in villi
Liver via hepatic
portal vein
TABLE 23.10
Carbohydrate Absorption
All carbohydrates are absorbed in the form of monosaccharides. The small intestine is highly efficient at this,
absorbing monosaccharides at an estimated rate of 120 grams per hour. All normally digested dietary carbohydrates
are absorbed; indigestible fibers are eliminated in the feces. The monosaccharides glucose and galactose are
transported into the epithelial cells by common protein carriers via secondary active transport (that is, co-transport
with sodium ions). The monosaccharides leave these cells via facilitated diffusion and enter the capillaries through
intercellular clefts. The monosaccharide fructose (which is in fruit) is absorbed and transported by facilitated
diffusion alone. The monosaccharides combine with the transport proteins immediately after the disaccharides are
broken down.
Protein Absorption
Active transport mechanisms, primarily in the duodenum and jejunum, absorb most proteins as their breakdown
products, amino acids. Almost all (95 to 98 percent) protein is digested and absorbed in the small intestine. The
type of carrier that transports an amino acid varies. Most carriers are linked to the active transport of sodium. Short
chains of two amino acids (dipeptides) or three amino acids (tripeptides) are also transported actively. However,
after they enter the absorptive epithelial cells, they are broken down into their amino acids before leaving the cell
and entering the capillary blood via diffusion.
Lipid Absorption
About 95 percent of lipids are absorbed in the small intestine. Bile salts not only speed up lipid digestion, they are
also essential to the absorption of the end products of lipid digestion. Short-chain fatty acids are relatively water
soluble and can enter the absorptive cells (enterocytes) directly. The small size of short-chain fatty acids enables
them to be absorbed by enterocytes via simple diffusion, and then take the same path as monosaccharides and
amino acids into the blood capillary of a villus.
The large and hydrophobic long-chain fatty acids and monoacylglycerides are not so easily suspended in the watery
intestinal chyme. However, bile salts and lecithin resolve this issue by enclosing them in a micelle, which is a tiny
sphere with polar (hydrophilic) ends facing the watery environment and hydrophobic tails turned to the interior,
creating a receptive environment for the long-chain fatty acids. The core also includes cholesterol and fat-soluble
vitamins. Without micelles, lipids would sit on the surface of chyme and never come in contact with the absorptive
surfaces of the epithelial cells. Micelles can easily squeeze between microvilli and get very near the luminal cell
surface. At this point, lipid substances exit the micelle and are absorbed via simple diffusion.
The free fatty acids and monoacylglycerides that enter the epithelial cells are reincorporated into triglycerides. The
triglycerides are mixed with phospholipids and cholesterol, and surrounded with a protein coat. This new complex,
called a chylomicron, is a water-soluble lipoprotein. After being processed by the Golgi apparatus, chylomicrons are
released from the cell (Figure 23.33). Too big to pass through the basement membranes of blood capillaries,
chylomicrons instead enter the large pores of lacteals. The lacteals come together to form the lymphatic vessels.
The chylomicrons are transported in the lymphatic vessels and empty through the thoracic duct into the subclavian
vein of the circulatory system. Once in the bloodstream, the enzyme lipoprotein lipase breaks down the
triglycerides of the chylomicrons into free fatty acids and glycerol. These breakdown products then pass through
capillary walls to be used for energy by cells or stored in adipose tissue as fat. Liver cells combine the remaining
chylomicron remnants with proteins, forming lipoproteins that transport cholesterol in the blood.
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1045
FIGURE 23.33
Lipid Absorption
Unlike amino acids and simple sugars, lipids are transformed as they are absorbed through epithelial
cells.
Nucleic Acid Absorption
The products of nucleic acid digestion—pentose sugars, nitrogenous bases, and phosphate ions—are transported by
carriers across the villus epithelium via active transport. These products then enter the bloodstream.
Mineral Absorption
The electrolytes absorbed by the small intestine are from both GI secretions and ingested foods. Since electrolytes
dissociate into ions in water, most are absorbed via active transport throughout the entire small intestine. During
absorption, co-transport mechanisms result in the accumulation of sodium ions inside the cells, whereas anti-port
mechanisms reduce the potassium ion concentration inside the cells. To restore the sodium-potassium gradient
across the cell membrane, a sodium-potassium pump requiring ATP pumps sodium out and potassium in.
In general, all minerals that enter the intestine are absorbed, whether you need them or not. Iron and calcium are
exceptions; they are absorbed in the duodenum in amounts that meet the body’s current requirements, as follows:
Iron—The ionic iron needed for the production of hemoglobin is absorbed into mucosal cells via active transport.
Once inside mucosal cells, ionic iron binds to the protein ferritin, creating iron-ferritin complexes that store iron until
needed. When the body has enough iron, most of the stored iron is lost when worn-out epithelial cells slough off.
When the body needs iron because, for example, it is lost during acute or chronic bleeding, there is increased uptake
of iron from the intestine and accelerated release of iron into the bloodstream. Since females experience significant
iron loss during menstruation, they have around four times as many iron transport proteins in their intestinal
epithelial cells as do males.
Calcium—Blood levels of ionic calcium determine the absorption of dietary calcium. When blood levels of ionic
calcium drop, parathyroid hormone (PTH) secreted by the parathyroid glands stimulates the release of calcium ions
from bone matrices and increases the reabsorption of calcium by the kidneys. PTH also upregulates the activation of
vitamin D in the kidney, which then facilitates intestinal calcium ion absorption.
Vitamin Absorption
The small intestine absorbs the vitamins that occur naturally in food and supplements. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E,
1046
23 • The Digestive System
Access for free at openstax.org
and K) are absorbed along with dietary lipids in micelles via simple diffusion. This is why you are advised to eat
some fatty foods when you take fat-soluble vitamin supplements. Most water-soluble vitamins (including most B
vitamins and vitamin C) also are absorbed by simple diffusion. An exception is vitamin B12, which is a very large
molecule. Intrinsic factor secreted in the stomach binds to vitamin B12, preventing its digestion and creating a
complex that binds to mucosal receptors in the terminal ileum, where it is taken up by endocytosis.
Water Absorption
Each day, about nine liters of fluid enter the small intestine. About 2.3 liters are ingested in foods and beverages,
and the rest is from GI secretions. About 90 percent of this water is absorbed in the small intestine. Water
absorption is driven by the concentration gradient of the water: The concentration of water is higher in chyme than it
is in epithelial cells. Thus, water moves down its concentration gradient from the chyme into cells. As noted earlier,
much of the remaining water is then absorbed in the colon.
23.7 • Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A Closer Look
1047
Key Terms
absorption
passage of digested products from the
intestinal lumen through mucosal cells and into the
bloodstream or lacteals
accessory digestive organ
includes teeth, tongue,
salivary glands, gallbladder, liver, and pancreas
accessory duct
(also, duct of Santorini) duct that runs
from the pancreas into the duodenum
acinus
cluster of glandular epithelial cells in the
pancreas that secretes pancreatic juice in the
pancreas
alimentary canal
continuous muscular digestive tube
that extends from the mouth to the anus
aminopeptidase
brush border enzyme that acts on
proteins
anal canal
final segment of the large intestine
anal column
long fold of mucosa in the anal canal
anal sinus
recess between anal columns
appendix
(vermiform appendix) coiled tube attached
to the cecum
ascending colon
first region of the colon
bacterial flora
bacteria in the large intestine
bile
alkaline solution produced by the liver and
important for the emulsification of lipids
bile canaliculus
small duct between hepatocytes
that collects bile
bilirubin
main bile pigment, which is responsible for
the brown color of feces
body
mid-portion of the stomach
bolus
mass of chewed food
brush border
fuzzy appearance of the small intestinal
mucosa created by microvilli
cardia
(also, cardiac region) part of the stomach
surrounding the cardiac orifice (esophageal hiatus)
cecum
pouch forming the beginning of the large
intestine
cementum
bone-like tissue covering the root of a
tooth
central vein
vein that receives blood from hepatic
sinusoids
cephalic phase
(also, reflex phase) initial phase of
gastric secretion that occurs before food enters the
stomach
chemical digestion
enzymatic breakdown of food
chief cell
gastric gland cell that secretes pepsinogen
chylomicron
large lipid-transport compound made up
of triglycerides, phospholipids, cholesterol, and
proteins
chyme
soupy liquid created when food is mixed with
digestive juices
circular fold
(also, plica circulare) deep fold in the
mucosa and submucosa of the small intestine
colon
part of the large intestine between the cecum
and the rectum
common bile duct
structure formed by the union of
the common hepatic duct and the gallbladder’s
cystic duct
common hepatic duct
duct formed by the merger of
the two hepatic ducts
crown
portion of tooth visible superior to the gum line
cuspid
(also, canine) pointed tooth used for tearing
and shredding food
cystic duct
duct through which bile drains and enters
the gallbladder
deciduous tooth
one of 20 “baby teeth”
defecation
elimination of undigested substances
from the body in the form of feces
deglutition
three-stage process of swallowing
dens
tooth
dentin
bone-like tissue immediately deep to the
enamel of the crown or cementum of the root of a
tooth
dentition
set of teeth
deoxyribonuclease
pancreatic enzyme that digests
DNA
descending colon
part of the colon between the
transverse colon and the sigmoid colon
dipeptidase
brush border enzyme that acts on
proteins
duodenal gland
(also, Brunner’s gland) mucous-
secreting gland in the duodenal submucosa
duodenum
first part of the small intestine, which
starts at the pyloric sphincter and ends at the
jejunum
enamel
covering of the dentin of the crown of a tooth
enteroendocrine cell
gastric gland cell that releases
hormones
enterohepatic circulation
recycling mechanism that
conserves bile salts
enteropeptidase
intestinal brush-border enzyme that
activates trypsinogen to trypsin
epiploic appendage
small sac of fat-filled visceral
peritoneum attached to teniae coli
esophagus
muscular tube that runs from the pharynx
to the stomach
external anal sphincter
voluntary skeletal muscle
sphincter in the anal canal
fauces
opening between the oral cavity and the
oropharynx
feces
semisolid waste product of digestion
flatus
gas in the intestine
fundus
dome-shaped region of the stomach above
and to the left of the cardia
G cell
gastrin-secreting enteroendocrine cell
gallbladder
accessory digestive organ that stores and
1048
23 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
concentrates bile
gastric emptying
process by which mixing waves
gradually cause the release of chyme into the
duodenum
gastric gland
gland in the stomach mucosal
epithelium that produces gastric juice
gastric phase
phase of gastric secretion that begins
when food enters the stomach
gastric pit
narrow channel formed by the epithelial
lining of the stomach mucosa
gastrin
peptide hormone that stimulates secretion of
hydrochloric acid and gut motility
gastrocolic reflex
propulsive movement in the colon
activated by the presence of food in the stomach
gastroileal reflex
long reflex that increases the
strength of segmentation in the ileum
gingiva
gum
haustral contraction
slow segmentation in the large
intestine
haustrum
small pouch in the colon created by tonic
contractions of teniae coli
hepatic artery
artery that supplies oxygenated blood
to the liver
hepatic lobule
hexagonal-shaped structure
composed of hepatocytes that radiate outward from
a central vein
hepatic portal vein
vein that supplies deoxygenated
nutrient-rich blood to the liver
hepatic sinusoid
blood capillaries between rows of
hepatocytes that receive blood from the hepatic
portal vein and the branches of the hepatic artery
hepatic vein
vein that drains into the inferior vena
cava
hepatocytes
major functional cells of the liver
hepatopancreatic ampulla
(also, ampulla of Vater)
bulb-like point in the wall of the duodenum where
the bile duct and main pancreatic duct unite
hepatopancreatic sphincter
(also, sphincter of Oddi)
sphincter regulating the flow of bile and pancreatic
juice into the duodenum
hydrochloric acid (HCl)
digestive acid secreted by
parietal cells in the stomach
ileocecal sphincter
sphincter located where the
small intestine joins with the large intestine
ileum
end of the small intestine between the jejunum
and the large intestine
incisor
midline, chisel-shaped tooth used for cutting
into food
ingestion
taking food into the GI tract through the
mouth
internal anal sphincter
involuntary smooth muscle
sphincter in the anal canal
intestinal gland
(also, crypt of Lieberkühn) gland in
the small intestinal mucosa that secretes intestinal
juice
intestinal juice
mixture of water and mucus that
helps absorb nutrients from chyme
intestinal phase
phase of gastric secretion that
begins when chyme enters the intestine
intrinsic factor
glycoprotein required for vitamin B12
absorption in the small intestine
jejunum
middle part of the small intestine between
the duodenum and the ileum
labial frenulum
midline mucous membrane fold that
attaches the inner surface of the lips to the gums
labium
lip
lactase
brush border enzyme that breaks down
lactose into glucose and galactose
lacteal
lymphatic capillary in the villi
large intestine
terminal portion of the alimentary
canal
laryngopharynx
part of the pharynx that functions in
respiration and digestion
left colic flexure
(also, splenic flexure) point where
the transverse colon curves below the inferior end
of the spleen
lingual frenulum
mucous membrane fold that
attaches the bottom of the tongue to the floor of the
mouth
lingual lipase
digestive enzyme from glands in the
tongue that acts on triglycerides
lipoprotein lipase
enzyme that breaks down
triglycerides in chylomicrons into fatty acids and
monoglycerides
liver
largest gland in the body whose main digestive
function is the production of bile
lower esophageal sphincter
smooth muscle
sphincter that regulates food movement from the
esophagus to the stomach
main pancreatic duct
(also, duct of Wirsung) duct
through which pancreatic juice drains from the
pancreas
major duodenal papilla
point at which the
hepatopancreatic ampulla opens into the duodenum
maltase
brush border enzyme that breaks down
maltose and maltotriose into two and three
molecules of glucose, respectively
mass movement
long, slow, peristaltic wave in the
large intestine
mastication
chewing
mechanical digestion
chewing, mixing, and
segmentation that prepares food for chemical
digestion
mesoappendix
mesentery of the appendix
micelle
tiny lipid-transport compound composed of
bile salts and phospholipids with a fatty acid and
23 • Key Terms
1049
monoacylglyceride core
microvillus
small projection of the plasma membrane
of the absorptive cells of the small intestinal
mucosa
migrating motility complex
form of peristalsis in the
small intestine
mixing wave
unique type of peristalsis that occurs in
the stomach
molar
tooth used for crushing and grinding food
motilin
hormone that initiates migrating motility
complexes
motility
movement of food through the GI tract
mucosa
innermost lining of the alimentary canal
mucosal barrier
protective barrier that prevents
gastric juice from destroying the stomach itself
mucous neck cell
gastric gland cell that secretes a
uniquely acidic mucus
muscularis
muscle (skeletal or smooth) layer of the
alimentary canal wall
myenteric plexus
(plexus of Auerbach) major nerve
supply to alimentary canal wall; controls motility
nucleosidase
brush border enzyme that digests
nucleotides
oral cavity
(also, buccal cavity) mouth
oral vestibule
part of the mouth bounded externally
by the cheeks and lips, and internally by the gums
and teeth
oropharynx
part of the pharynx continuous with the
oral cavity that functions in respiration and digestion
palatoglossal arch
muscular fold that extends from
the lateral side of the soft palate to the base of the
tongue
palatopharyngeal arch
muscular fold that extends
from the lateral side of the soft palate to the side of
the pharynx
pancreas
accessory digestive organ that secretes
pancreatic juice
pancreatic amylase
enzyme secreted by the
pancreas that completes the chemical digestion of
carbohydrates in the small intestine
pancreatic juice
secretion of the pancreas containing
digestive enzymes and bicarbonate
pancreatic lipase
enzyme secreted by the pancreas
that participates in lipid digestion
pancreatic nuclease
enzyme secreted by the
pancreas that participates in nucleic acid digestion
parietal cell
gastric gland cell that secretes
hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor
parotid gland
one of a pair of major salivary glands
located inferior and anterior to the ears
pectinate line
horizontal line that runs like a ring,
perpendicular to the inferior margins of the anal
sinuses
pepsinogen
inactive form of pepsin
peristalsis
muscular contractions and relaxations
that propel food through the GI tract
permanent tooth
one of 32 adult teeth
pharynx
throat
phosphatase
brush border enzyme that digests
nucleotides
porta hepatis
“gateway to the liver” where the
hepatic artery and hepatic portal vein enter the liver
portal triad
bile duct, hepatic artery branch, and
hepatic portal vein branch
premolar
(also, bicuspid) transitional tooth used for
mastication, crushing, and grinding food
propulsion
voluntary process of swallowing and the
involuntary process of peristalsis that moves food
through the digestive tract
pulp cavity
deepest portion of a tooth, containing
nerve endings and blood vessels
pyloric antrum
wider, more superior part of the
pylorus
pyloric canal
narrow, more inferior part of the pylorus
pyloric sphincter
sphincter that controls stomach
emptying
pylorus
lower, funnel-shaped part of the stomach
that is continuous with the duodenum
rectal valve
one of three transverse folds in the
rectum where feces is separated from flatus
rectum
part of the large intestine between the
sigmoid colon and anal canal
reticuloendothelial cell
(also, Kupffer cell)
phagocyte in hepatic sinusoids that filters out
material from venous blood from the alimentary
canal
retroperitoneal
located posterior to the peritoneum
ribonuclease
pancreatic enzyme that digests RNA
right colic flexure
(also, hepatic flexure) point, at the
inferior surface of the liver, where the ascending
colon turns abruptly to the left
root
portion of a tooth embedded in the alveolar
processes beneath the gum line
ruga
fold of alimentary canal mucosa and submucosa
in the empty stomach and other organs
saccharolytic fermentation
anaerobic
decomposition of carbohydrates
saliva
aqueous solution of proteins and ions secreted
into the mouth by the salivary glands
salivary amylase
digestive enzyme in saliva that acts
on starch
salivary gland
an exocrine gland that secretes a
digestive fluid called saliva
salivation
secretion of saliva
segmentation
alternating contractions and
relaxations of non-adjacent segments of the
1050
23 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
intestine that move food forward and backward,
breaking it apart and mixing it with digestive juices
serosa
outermost layer of the alimentary canal wall
present in regions within the abdominal cavity
sigmoid colon
end portion of the colon, which
terminates at the rectum
small intestine
section of the alimentary canal where
most digestion and absorption occurs
soft palate
posterior region of the bottom portion of
the nasal cavity that consists of skeletal muscle
stomach
alimentary canal organ that contributes to
chemical and mechanical digestion of food from the
esophagus before releasing it, as chyme, to the
small intestine
sublingual gland
one of a pair of major salivary
glands located beneath the tongue
submandibular gland
one of a pair of major salivary
glands located in the floor of the mouth
submucosa
layer of dense connective tissue in the
alimentary canal wall that binds the overlying
mucosa to the underlying muscularis
submucosal plexus
(plexus of Meissner) nerve
supply that regulates activity of glands and smooth
muscle
sucrase
brush border enzyme that breaks down
sucrose into glucose and fructose
tenia coli
one of three smooth muscle bands that
make up the longitudinal muscle layer of the
muscularis in all of the large intestine except the
terminal end
tongue
accessory digestive organ of the mouth, the
bulk of which is composed of skeletal muscle
transverse colon
part of the colon between the
ascending colon and the descending colon
upper esophageal sphincter
skeletal muscle
sphincter that regulates food movement from the
pharynx to the esophagus
Valsalva’s maneuver
voluntary contraction of the
diaphragm and abdominal wall muscles and closing
of the glottis, which increases intra-abdominal
pressure and facilitates defecation
villus
projection of the mucosa of the small intestine
voluntary phase
initial phase of deglutition, in which
the bolus moves from the mouth to the oropharynx
α-dextrin
breakdown product of starch
α-dextrinase
brush border enzyme that acts on α-
dextrins
Chapter Review
23.1 Overview of the Digestive System
The digestive system includes the organs of the
alimentary canal and accessory structures. The
alimentary canal forms a continuous tube that is open
to the outside environment at both ends. The organs of
the alimentary canal are the mouth, pharynx,
esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large
intestine. The accessory digestive structures include
the teeth, tongue, salivary glands, liver, pancreas, and
gallbladder. The wall of the alimentary canal is
composed of four basic tissue layers: mucosa,
submucosa, muscularis, and serosa. The enteric
nervous system provides intrinsic innervation, and the
autonomic nervous system provides extrinsic
innervation.
23.2 Digestive System Processes and
Regulation
The digestive system ingests and digests food, absorbs
released nutrients, and excretes food components that
are indigestible. The six activities involved in this
process are ingestion, motility, mechanical digestion,
chemical digestion, absorption, and defecation. These
processes are regulated by neural and hormonal
mechanisms.
23.3 The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
In the mouth, the tongue and the teeth begin
mechanical digestion, and saliva begins chemical
digestion. The pharynx, which plays roles in breathing
and vocalization as well as digestion, runs from the
nasal and oral cavities superiorly to the esophagus
inferiorly (for digestion) and to the larynx anteriorly (for
respiration). During deglutition (swallowing), the soft
palate rises to close off the nasopharynx, the larynx
elevates, and the epiglottis folds over the glottis. The
esophagus includes an upper esophageal sphincter
made of skeletal muscle, which regulates the
movement of food from the pharynx to the esophagus.
It also has a lower esophageal sphincter, made of
smooth muscle, which controls the passage of food
from the esophagus to the stomach. Cells in the
esophageal wall secrete mucus that eases the passage
of the food bolus.
23.4 The Stomach
The stomach participates in all digestive activities
except ingestion and defecation. It vigorously churns
food. It secretes gastric juices that break down food
and absorbs certain drugs, including aspirin and some
alcohol. The stomach begins the digestion of protein
and continues the digestion of carbohydrates and fats.
It stores food as an acidic liquid called chyme, and
23 • Chapter Review
1051
releases it gradually into the small intestine through
the pyloric sphincter.
23.5 The Small and Large Intestines
The three main regions of the small intestine are the
duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. The small
intestine is where digestion is completed and virtually
all absorption occurs. These two activities are
facilitated by structural adaptations that increase the
mucosal surface area by 600-fold, including circular
folds, villi, and microvilli. There are around 200 million
microvilli per square millimeter of small intestine,
which contain brush border enzymes that complete the
digestion of carbohydrates and proteins. Combined
with pancreatic juice, intestinal juice provides the liquid
medium needed to further digest and absorb
substances from chyme. The small intestine is also the
site of unique mechanical digestive movements.
Segmentation moves the chyme back and forth,
increasing mixing and opportunities for absorption.
Migrating motility complexes propel the residual
chyme toward the large intestine.
The main regions of the large intestine are the cecum,
the colon, and the rectum. The large intestine absorbs
water and forms feces, and is responsible for
defecation. Bacterial flora break down additional
carbohydrate residue, and synthesize certain vitamins.
The mucosa of the large intestinal wall is generously
endowed with goblet cells, which secrete mucus that
eases the passage of feces. The entry of feces into the
rectum activates the defecation reflex.
23.6 Accessory Organs in Digestion: The
Liver, Pancreas, and Gallbladder
Chemical digestion in the small intestine cannot occur
without the help of the liver and pancreas. The liver
produces bile and delivers it to the common hepatic
duct. Bile contains bile salts and phospholipids, which
emulsify large lipid globules into tiny lipid droplets, a
necessary step in lipid digestion and absorption. The
gallbladder stores and concentrates bile, releasing it
when it is needed by the small intestine.
The pancreas produces the enzyme- and bicarbonate-
rich pancreatic juice and delivers it to the small
intestine through ducts. Pancreatic juice buffers the
acidic gastric juice in chyme, inactivates pepsin from
the stomach, and enables the optimal functioning of
digestive enzymes in the small intestine.
23.7 Chemical Digestion and Absorption: A
Closer Look
The small intestine is the site of most chemical
digestion and almost all absorption. Chemical digestion
breaks large food molecules down into their chemical
building blocks, which can then be absorbed through
the intestinal wall and into the general circulation.
Intestinal brush border enzymes and pancreatic
enzymes are responsible for the majority of chemical
digestion. The breakdown of fat also requires bile.
Most nutrients are absorbed by transport mechanisms
at the apical surface of enterocytes. Exceptions include
lipids, fat-soluble vitamins, and most water-soluble
vitamins. With the help of bile salts and lecithin, the
dietary fats are emulsified to form micelles, which can
carry the fat particles to the surface of the enterocytes.
There, the micelles release their fats to diffuse across
the cell membrane. The fats are then reassembled into
triglycerides and mixed with other lipids and proteins
into chylomicrons that can pass into lacteals. Other
absorbed monomers travel from blood capillaries in
the villus to the hepatic portal vein and then to the
liver.
Interactive Link Questions
1. By clicking on this link (http://openstax.org/l/
fooddigestion), you can watch a short video of what
happens to the food you eat as it passes from your
mouth to your intestine. Along the way, note how
the food changes consistency and form. How does
this change in consistency facilitate your gaining
nutrients from food?
2. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/fooddigestion2)
for an overview of digestion of food in different
regions of the digestive tract. Note the route of non-
fat nutrients from the small intestine to their
release as nutrients to the body.
3. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
swallowing) to see how swallowing is a complex
process that involves the nervous system to
coordinate the actions of upper respiratory and
digestive activities. During which stage of
swallowing is there a risk of food entering
respiratory pathways and how is this risk blocked?
4. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
stomach1) that depicts the structure of the
stomach and how this structure functions in the
initiation of protein digestion. This view of the
stomach shows the characteristic rugae. What is
the function of these rugae?
1052
23 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
5. Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
sintestine) that depicts the structure of the small
intestine, and, in particular, the villi. Epithelial cells
continue the digestion and absorption of nutrients
and transport these nutrients to the lymphatic and
circulatory systems. In the small intestine, the
products of food digestion are absorbed by different
structures in the villi. Which structure absorbs and
transports fats?
6. By watching this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
foodgroups), you will see that for the various food
groups—proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates—digestion begins in different parts
of the digestion system, though all end in the same
place. Of the three major food classes
(carbohydrates, fats, and proteins), which is
digested in the mouth, the stomach, and the small
intestine?
7. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/liver) to see
the structure of the liver and how this structure
supports the functions of the liver, including the
processing of nutrients, toxins, and wastes. At rest,
about 1500 mL of blood per minute flow through
the liver. What percentage of this blood flow comes
from the hepatic portal system?
Review Questions
8. Which of these organs is not considered an
accessory digestive structure?
a.
mouth
b.
salivary glands
c.
pancreas
d.
liver
9. Which of the following organs is supported by a
layer of adventitia rather than serosa?
a.
esophagus
b.
stomach
c.
small intestine
d.
large intestine
10. Which of the following membranes covers the
stomach?
a.
falciform ligament
b.
mesocolon
c.
parietal peritoneum
d.
visceral peritoneum
11. Which of these processes occurs in the mouth?
a.
ingestion
b.
mechanical digestion
c.
chemical digestion
d.
all of the above
12. Which of these processes occurs throughout most
of the alimentary canal?
a.
ingestion
b.
propulsion
c.
segmentation
d.
absorption
13. Which of the following stimuli activates sensors in
the walls of digestive organs?
a.
breakdown products of digestion
b.
distension
c.
pH of chyme
d.
all of the above
14. Which of these statements about reflexes in the
GI tract is false?
a.
Short reflexes are provoked by nerves near
the GI tract.
b.
Short reflexes are mediated by the enteric
nervous system.
c.
Food that distends the stomach initiates long
reflexes.
d.
Long reflexes can be provoked by stimuli
originating outside the GI tract.
15. Which of these ingredients in saliva is responsible
for activating salivary amylase?
a.
mucus
b.
phosphate ions
c.
chloride ions
d.
urea
16. Which of these statements about the pharynx is
true?
a.
It extends from the nasal and oral cavities
superiorly to the esophagus anteriorly.
b.
The oropharynx is continuous superiorly with
the nasopharynx.
c.
The nasopharynx is involved in digestion.
d.
The laryngopharynx is composed partially of
cartilage.
23 • Review Questions
1053
17. Which structure is located where the esophagus
penetrates the diaphragm?
a.
esophageal hiatus
b.
cardiac orifice
c.
upper esophageal sphincter
d.
lower esophageal sphincter
18. Which phase of deglutition involves contraction of
the longitudinal muscle layer of the muscularis?
a.
voluntary phase
b.
buccal phase
c.
pharyngeal phase
d.
esophageal phase
19. Which of these cells secrete hormones?
a.
parietal cells
b.
mucous neck cells
c.
enteroendocrine cells
d.
chief cells
20. Where does the majority of chemical digestion in
the stomach occur?
a.
fundus and body
b.
cardia and fundus
c.
body and pylorus
d.
body
21. During gastric emptying, chyme is released into
the duodenum through the ________.
a.
esophageal hiatus
b.
pyloric antrum
c.
pyloric canal
d.
pyloric sphincter
22. Parietal cells secrete ________.
a.
gastrin
b.
hydrochloric acid
c.
pepsin
d.
pepsinogen
23. In which part of the alimentary canal does most
digestion occur?
a.
stomach
b.
proximal small intestine
c.
distal small intestine
d.
ascending colon
24. Which of these is most associated with villi?
a.
haustra
b.
lacteals
c.
bacterial flora
d.
intestinal glands
25. What is the role of the small intestine’s MALT?
a.
secreting mucus
b.
buffering acidic chyme
c.
activating pepsin
d.
preventing bacteria from entering the
bloodstream
26. Which part of the large intestine attaches to the
appendix?
a.
cecum
b.
ascending colon
c.
transverse colon
d.
descending colon
27. Which of these statements about bile is true?
a.
About 500 mL is secreted daily.
b.
Its main function is the denaturation of
proteins.
c.
It is synthesized in the gallbladder.
d.
Bile salts are recycled.
28. Pancreatic juice ________.
a.
deactivates bile.
b.
is secreted by pancreatic islet cells.
c.
buffers chyme.
d.
is released into the cystic duct.
29. Where does the chemical digestion of starch
begin?
a.
mouth
b.
esophagus
c.
stomach
d.
small intestine
30. Which of these is involved in the chemical
digestion of protein?
a.
pancreatic amylase
b.
trypsin
c.
sucrase
d.
pancreatic nuclease
31. Where are most fat-digesting enzymes produced?
a.
small intestine
b.
gallbladder
c.
liver
d.
pancreas
32. Which of these nutrients is absorbed mainly in the
duodenum?
a.
glucose
b.
iron
c.
sodium
d.
water
1054
23 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
Critical Thinking Questions
33. Explain how the enteric nervous system supports
the digestive system. What might occur that could
result in the autonomic nervous system having a
negative impact on digestion?
34. What layer of the alimentary canal tissue is
capable of helping to protect the body against
disease, and through what mechanism?
35. Offer a theory to explain why segmentation occurs
and peristalsis slows in the small intestine.
36. It has been several hours since you last ate.
Walking past a bakery, you catch a whiff of freshly
baked bread. What type of reflex is triggered, and
what is the result?
37. The composition of saliva varies from gland to
gland. Discuss how saliva produced by the parotid
gland differs in action from saliva produced by the
sublingual gland.
38. During a hockey game, the puck hits a player in
the mouth, knocking out all eight of their most
anterior teeth. Which teeth did the player lose and
how does this loss affect food ingestion?
39. What prevents swallowed food from entering the
airways?
40. Explain the mechanism responsible for
gastroesophageal reflux.
41. Describe the three processes involved in the
esophageal phase of deglutition.
42. Explain how the stomach is protected from self-
digestion and why this is necessary.
43. Describe unique anatomical features that enable
the stomach to perform digestive functions.
44. Explain how nutrients absorbed in the small
intestine pass into the general circulation.
45. Why is it important that chyme from the stomach
is delivered to the small intestine slowly and in
small amounts?
46. Describe three of the differences between the
walls of the large and small intestines.
47. Why does the pancreas secrete some enzymes in
their inactive forms, and where are these enzymes
activated?
48. Describe the location of hepatocytes in the liver
and how this arrangement enhances their
function.
49. Explain the role of bile salts and lecithin in the
emulsification of lipids (fats).
50. How is vitamin B12 absorbed?
23 • Critical Thinking Questions
1055
1056
23 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 24
Metabolism and Nutrition
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the processes involved in anabolic and catabolic reactions
•
List and describe the steps necessary for carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism
•
Explain the processes that regulate glucose levels during the absorptive and postabsorptive states
•
Explain how metabolism is essential to maintaining body temperature (thermoregulation)
•
Summarize the importance of vitamins and minerals in the diet
Eating is essential to life. Many of us look to eating as not only a necessity, but also a pleasure. You
may have been told since childhood to start the day with a good breakfast to give you the energy to get through most
of the day. You most likely have heard about the importance of a balanced diet, with plenty of fruits and vegetables.
But what does this all mean to your body and the physiological processes it carries out each day? You need to
absorb a range of nutrients so that your cells have the building blocks for metabolic processes that release the
energy for the cells to carry out their daily jobs, to manufacture new proteins, cells, and body parts, and to recycle
materials in the cell.
This chapter will take you through some of the chemical reactions essential to life, the sum of which is referred to as
metabolism. The focus of these discussions will be anabolic reactions and catabolic reactions. You will examine the
various chemical reactions that are important to sustain life, including why you must have oxygen, how mitochondria
transfer energy, and the importance of certain “metabolic” hormones and vitamins.
Metabolism varies, depending on age, sex, activity level, fuel consumption, and lean body mass. Your own metabolic
rate fluctuates throughout life. By modifying your diet and exercise regimen, you can increase both lean body mass
and metabolic rate. Factors affecting metabolism also play important roles in controlling muscle mass. Aging is
known to decrease the metabolic rate by as much as 5 percent per year. Additionally, because males tend have
more lean muscle mass then females, their basal metabolic rate (metabolic rate at rest) is higher; therefore, males
tend to burn more calories than females do. Lastly, an individual’s inherent metabolic rate is a function of the
Figure 24.1
Metabolism Metabolism is the sum of all energy-requiring and energy-consuming processes of the body. Many factors
contribute to overall metabolism, including lean muscle mass, the amount and quality of food consumed, and the physical demands placed
on the human body. (credit: "tableatny"/flickr.com)
proteins and enzymes derived from their genetic background. Thus, your genes play a big role in your metabolism.
Nonetheless, each person’s body engages in the same overall metabolic processes.
24.1 Overview of Metabolic Reactions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the process by which polymers are broken down into monomers
•
Describe the process by which monomers are combined into polymers
•
Discuss the role of ATP in metabolism
•
Explain oxidation-reduction reactions
•
Describe the hormones that regulate anabolic and catabolic reactions
Metabolic processes are constantly taking place in the body. Metabolism is the sum of all of the chemical reactions
that are involved in catabolism and anabolism. The reactions governing the breakdown of food to obtain energy are
called catabolic reactions. Conversely, anabolic reactions use the energy produced by catabolic reactions to
synthesize larger molecules from smaller ones, such as when the body forms proteins by stringing together amino
acids. Both sets of reactions are critical to maintaining life.
Because catabolic reactions produce energy and anabolic reactions use energy, ideally, energy usage would balance
the energy produced. If the net energy change is positive (catabolic reactions release more energy than the anabolic
reactions use), then the body stores the excess energy by building fat molecules for long-term storage. On the other
hand, if the net energy change is negative (catabolic reactions release less energy than anabolic reactions use), the
body uses stored energy to compensate for the deficiency of energy released by catabolism.
Catabolic Reactions
Catabolic reactions break down large organic molecules into smaller molecules, releasing the energy contained in
the chemical bonds. These energy releases (conversions) are not 100 percent efficient. The amount of energy
released is less than the total amount contained in the molecule. Approximately 40 percent of energy yielded from
catabolic reactions is directly transferred to the high-energy molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP, the
energy currency of cells, can be used immediately to power molecular machines that support cell, tissue, and organ
function. This includes building new tissue and repairing damaged tissue. ATP can also be stored to fulfill future
energy demands. The remaining 60 percent of the energy released from catabolic reactions is given off as heat,
which tissues and body fluids absorb.
Structurally, ATP molecules consist of an adenine, a ribose, and three phosphate groups (Figure 24.2). The chemical
bond between the second and third phosphate groups, termed a high-energy bond, represents the greatest source
of energy in a cell. It is the first bond that catabolic enzymes break when cells require energy to do work. The
products of this reaction are a molecule of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and a lone phosphate group (Pi). ATP, ADP,
and Pi are constantly being cycled through reactions that build ATP and store energy, and reactions that break down
ATP and release energy.
1058
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 24.2
Structure of ATP Molecule
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is the energy molecule of the cell. During catabolic reactions,
ATP is created and energy is stored until needed during anabolic reactions.
The energy from ATP drives all bodily functions, such as contracting muscles, maintaining the electrical potential of
nerve cells, and absorbing food in the gastrointestinal tract. The metabolic reactions that produce ATP come from
various sources (Figure 24.3).
24.1 • Overview of Metabolic Reactions
1059
FIGURE 24.3
Sources of ATP
During catabolic reactions, proteins are broken down into amino acids, lipids are broken down into fatty
acids, and polysaccharides are broken down into monosaccharides. These building blocks are then used for the synthesis of molecules in
anabolic reactions.
Of the four major macromolecular groups (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids) that are processed by
digestion, carbohydrates are considered the most common source of energy to fuel the body. They take the form of
either complex carbohydrates, polysaccharides like starch and glycogen, or simple sugars (monosaccharides) like
glucose and fructose. Sugar catabolism breaks polysaccharides down into their individual monosaccharides. Among
the monosaccharides, glucose is the most common fuel for ATP production in cells, and as such, there are a number
of endocrine control mechanisms to regulate glucose concentration in the bloodstream. Excess glucose is either
stored as an energy reserve in the liver and skeletal muscles as the complex polymer glycogen, or it is converted
into fat (triglyceride) in adipose cells (adipocytes).
Among the lipids (fats), triglycerides are most often used for energy via a metabolic process called β-oxidation.
About one-half of excess fat is stored in adipocytes that accumulate in the subcutaneous tissue under the skin,
whereas the rest is stored in adipocytes in other tissues and organs.
Proteins, which are polymers, can be broken down into their monomers, individual amino acids. Amino acids can be
used as building blocks of new proteins or broken down further for the production of ATP. When one is chronically
starving, this use of amino acids for energy production can lead to a wasting away of the body, as more and more
proteins are broken down.
Nucleic acids are present in most of the foods you eat. During digestion, nucleic acids including DNA and various
RNAs are broken down into their constituent nucleotides. These nucleotides are readily absorbed and transported
throughout the body to be used by individual cells during nucleic acid metabolism.
1060
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Anabolic Reactions
In contrast to catabolic reactions, anabolic reactions involve the joining of smaller molecules into larger ones.
Anabolic reactions combine monosaccharides to form polysaccharides, fatty acids to form triglycerides, amino acids
to form proteins, and nucleotides to form nucleic acids. These processes require energy in the form of ATP
molecules generated by catabolic reactions. Anabolic reactions, also called biosynthesis reactions, create new
molecules that form new cells and tissues, and revitalize organs.
Hormonal Regulation of Metabolism
Catabolic and anabolic hormones in the body help regulate metabolic processes. Catabolic hormones stimulate the
breakdown of molecules and the production of energy. These include cortisol, glucagon, adrenaline/epinephrine,
and cytokines. All of these hormones are mobilized at specific times to meet the needs of the body. Anabolic
hormones are required for the synthesis of molecules and include growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor,
insulin, testosterone, and estrogen. Table 24.1 summarizes the function of each of the catabolic hormones and
Table 24.2 summarizes the functions of the anabolic hormones.
Catabolic Hormones
Hormone
Function
Cortisol
Released from the adrenal gland in response to stress; its main role is to increase blood glucose
levels by gluconeogenesis (breaking down fats and proteins)
Glucagon
Released from alpha cells in the pancreas either when starving or when the body needs to
generate additional energy; it stimulates the breakdown of glycogen in the liver to increase blood
glucose levels; its effect is the opposite of insulin; glucagon and insulin are a part of a negative-
feedback system that stabilizes blood glucose levels
Adrenaline/
epinephrine
Released in response to the activation of the sympathetic nervous system; increases heart rate
and heart contractility, constricts blood vessels, is a bronchodilator that opens (dilates) the
bronchi of the lungs to increase air volume in the lungs, and stimulates gluconeogenesis
TABLE 24.1
Anabolic Hormones
Hormone
Function
Growth
hormone
(GH)
Synthesized and released from the pituitary gland; stimulates the growth of cells, tissues, and
bones
Insulin-like
growth
factor (IGF)
Stimulates the growth of muscle and bone while also inhibiting cell death (apoptosis)
Insulin
Produced by the beta cells of the pancreas; plays an essential role in carbohydrate and fat
metabolism, controls blood glucose levels, and promotes the uptake of glucose into body cells;
causes cells in muscle, adipose tissue, and liver to take up glucose from the blood and store it in
the liver and muscle as glycogen; its effect is the opposite of glucagon; glucagon and insulin are
a part of a negative-feedback system that stabilizes blood glucose levels
TABLE 24.2
24.1 • Overview of Metabolic Reactions
1061
Hormone
Function
Testosterone
Produced by the testes in males and the ovaries in females; stimulates an increase in muscle
mass and strength as well as the growth and strengthening of bone
Estrogen
Produced primarily by the ovaries, it is also produced by the liver and adrenal glands; its anabolic
functions include increasing metabolism and fat deposition
TABLE 24.2
Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
The chemical reactions underlying metabolism involve the transfer of electrons from one compound to another by
processes catalyzed by enzymes. The electrons in these reactions commonly come from hydrogen atoms, which
consist of an electron and a proton. A molecule gives up a hydrogen atom, in the form of a hydrogen ion (H+) and an
electron, breaking the molecule into smaller parts. The loss of an electron, or oxidation, releases a small amount of
energy; both the electron and the energy are then passed to another molecule in the process of reduction, or the
gaining of an electron. These two reactions always happen together in an oxidation-reduction reaction (also called
a redox reaction)—when an electron is passed between molecules, the donor is oxidized and the recipient is
reduced. Oxidation-reduction reactions often happen in a series, so that a molecule that is reduced is subsequently
Disorders of the...
Metabolic Processes: Cushing Syndrome and Addison’s Disease
As might be expected for a fundamental physiological process like metabolism, errors or malfunctions in
metabolic processing lead to a pathophysiology or—if uncorrected—a disease state. Metabolic diseases are most
commonly the result of malfunctioning proteins or enzymes that are critical to one or more metabolic pathways.
Protein or enzyme malfunction can be the consequence of a genetic alteration or mutation. However, normally
functioning proteins and enzymes can also have deleterious effects if their availability is not appropriately
matched with metabolic need. For example, excessive production of the hormone cortisol (see Table 24.1) gives
rise to Cushing syndrome. Clinically, Cushing syndrome is characterized by rapid weight gain, especially in the
trunk and face region, depression, and anxiety. It is worth mentioning that tumors of the pituitary that produce
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which subsequently stimulates the adrenal cortex to release excessive
cortisol, produce similar effects. This indirect mechanism of cortisol overproduction is referred to as Cushing
disease.
Patients with Cushing syndrome can exhibit high blood glucose levels and are at an increased risk of becoming
obese. They also show slow growth, accumulation of fat between the shoulders, weak muscles, bone pain
(because cortisol causes proteins to be broken down to make glucose via gluconeogenesis), and fatigue. Other
symptoms include excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), capillary dilation, and thinning of the skin, which can lead
to easy bruising. The treatments for Cushing syndrome are all focused on reducing excessive cortisol levels.
Depending on the cause of the excess, treatment may be as simple as discontinuing the use of cortisol
ointments. In cases of tumors, surgery is often used to remove the offending tumor. Where surgery is
inappropriate, radiation therapy can be used to reduce the size of a tumor or ablate portions of the adrenal
cortex. Finally, medications are available that can help to regulate the amounts of cortisol.
Insufficient cortisol production is equally problematic. Adrenal insufficiency, or Addison’s disease, is
characterized by the reduced production of cortisol from the adrenal gland. It can result from malfunction of the
adrenal glands—they do not produce enough cortisol—or it can be a consequence of decreased ACTH availability
from the pituitary. Patients with Addison’s disease may have low blood pressure, paleness, extreme weakness,
fatigue, slow or sluggish movements, lightheadedness, and salt cravings due to the loss of sodium and high
blood potassium levels (hyperkalemia). Victims also may suffer from loss of appetite, chronic diarrhea, vomiting,
mouth lesions, and patchy skin color. Diagnosis typically involves blood tests and imaging tests of the adrenal
and pituitary glands. Treatment involves cortisol replacement therapy, which usually must be continued for life.
1062
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
oxidized, passing on not only the electron it just received but also the energy it received. As the series of reactions
progresses, energy accumulates that is used to combine Pi and ADP to form ATP, the high-energy molecule that the
body uses for fuel.
Oxidation-reduction reactions are catalyzed by enzymes that trigger the removal of hydrogen atoms. Coenzymes
work with enzymes and accept hydrogen atoms. The two most common coenzymes of oxidation-reduction reactions
are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Their respective reduced
coenzymes are NADH and FADH2, which are energy-containing molecules used to transfer energy during the
creation of ATP.
24.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the processes of glycolysis
•
Describe the pathway of a pyruvate molecule through the Krebs cycle
•
Explain the transport of electrons through the electron transport chain
•
Describe the process of ATP production through oxidative phosphorylation
•
Summarize the process of gluconeogenesis
Carbohydrates are organic molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. The family of
carbohydrates includes both simple and complex sugars. Glucose and fructose are examples of simple sugars, and
starch, glycogen, and cellulose are all examples of complex sugars. The complex sugars are also called
polysaccharides and are made of multiple monosaccharide molecules. Polysaccharides serve as energy storage
(e.g., starch and glycogen) and as structural components (e.g., chitin in insects and cellulose in plants).
During digestion, carbohydrates are broken down into simple, soluble sugars that can be transported across the
intestinal wall into the circulatory system to be transported throughout the body. Carbohydrate digestion begins in
the mouth with the action of salivary amylase on starches and ends with monosaccharides being absorbed across
the epithelium of the small intestine. Once the absorbed monosaccharides are transported to the tissues, the
process of cellular respiration begins (Figure 24.4). This section will focus first on glycolysis, a process where the
monosaccharide glucose is oxidized, releasing the energy stored in its bonds to produce ATP.
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1063
FIGURE 24.4
Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration oxidizes glucose molecules through glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and oxidative
phosphorylation to produce ATP.
Glycolysis
Glucose is the body’s most readily available source of energy. After digestive processes break polysaccharides down
into monosaccharides, including glucose, the monosaccharides are transported across the wall of the small
intestine and into the circulatory system, which transports them to the liver. In the liver, hepatocytes either pass the
glucose on through the circulatory system or store excess glucose as glycogen. Cells in the body take up the
circulating glucose in response to insulin and, through a series of reactions called glycolysis, transfer some of the
energy in glucose to ADP to form ATP (Figure 24.5). The last step in glycolysis produces the product pyruvate.
Glycolysis begins with the phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase to form glucose-6-phosphate. This step uses
one ATP, which is the donor of the phosphate group. Under the action of phosphofructokinase, glucose-6-phosphate
is converted into fructose-6-phosphate. At this point, a second ATP donates its phosphate group, forming
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. This six-carbon sugar is split to form two phosphorylated three-carbon molecules,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which are both converted into
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is further phosphorylated with groups donated by
dihydrogen phosphate present in the cell to form the three-carbon molecule 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. The energy
of this reaction comes from the oxidation of (removal of electrons from) glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. In a series of
1064
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
reactions leading to pyruvate, the two phosphate groups are then transferred to two ADPs to form two ATPs. Thus,
glycolysis uses two ATPs but generates four ATPs, yielding a net gain of two ATPs and two molecules of pyruvate. In
the presence of oxygen, pyruvate continues on to the Krebs cycle (also called the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic
acid cycle (TCA), where additional energy is extracted and passed on.
FIGURE 24.5
Glycolysis Overview
During the energy-consuming phase of glycolysis, two ATPs are consumed, transferring two
phosphates to the glucose molecule. The glucose molecule then splits into two three-carbon compounds, each containing a phosphate.
During the second phase, an additional phosphate is added to each of the three-carbon compounds. The energy for this endergonic
reaction is provided by the removal (oxidation) of two electrons from each three-carbon compound. During the energy-releasing phase, the
phosphates are removed from both three-carbon compounds and used to produce four ATP molecules.
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1065
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/glycolysis1) to learn about glycolysis.
Glycolysis can be divided into two phases: energy consuming (also called chemical priming) and energy yielding.
The first phase is the energy-consuming phase, so it requires two ATP molecules to start the reaction for each
molecule of glucose. However, the end of the reaction produces four ATPs, resulting in a net gain of two ATP energy
molecules.
Glycolysis can be expressed as the following equation:
This equation states that glucose, in combination with ATP (the energy source), NAD+ (a coenzyme that serves as an
electron acceptor), and inorganic phosphate, breaks down into two pyruvate molecules, generating four ATP
molecules—for a net yield of two ATP—and two energy-containing NADH coenzymes. The NADH that is produced in
this process will be used later to produce ATP in the mitochondria. Importantly, by the end of this process, one
glucose molecule generates two pyruvate molecules, two high-energy ATP molecules, and two electron-carrying
NADH molecules.
The following discussions of glycolysis include the enzymes responsible for the reactions. When glucose enters a
cell, the enzyme hexokinase (or glucokinase, in the liver) rapidly adds a phosphate to convert it into
glucose-6-phosphate. A kinase is a type of enzyme that adds a phosphate molecule to a substrate (in this case,
glucose, but it can be true of other molecules also). This conversion step requires one ATP and essentially traps the
glucose in the cell, preventing it from passing back through the plasma membrane, thus allowing glycolysis to
proceed. It also functions to maintain a concentration gradient with higher glucose levels in the blood than in the
tissues. By establishing this concentration gradient, the glucose in the blood will be able to flow from an area of high
concentration (the blood) into an area of low concentration (the tissues) to be either used or stored. Hexokinase is
found in nearly every tissue in the body. Glucokinase, on the other hand, is expressed in tissues that are active
when blood glucose levels are high, such as the liver. Hexokinase has a higher affinity for glucose than glucokinase
and therefore is able to convert glucose at a faster rate than glucokinase. This is important when levels of glucose
are very low in the body, as it allows glucose to travel preferentially to those tissues that require it more.
In the next step of the first phase of glycolysis, the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate isomerase converts
glucose-6-phosphate into fructose-6-phosphate. Like glucose, fructose is also a six carbon-containing sugar. The
enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 then adds one more phosphate to convert fructose-6-phosphate into
fructose-1-6-bisphosphate, another six-carbon sugar, using another ATP molecule. Aldolase then breaks down this
fructose-1-6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon molecules, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. The triosephosphate isomerase enzyme then converts dihydroxyacetone phosphate into a second
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecule. Therefore, by the end of this chemical-priming or energy-consuming phase,
one glucose molecule is broken down into two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules.
The second phase of glycolysis, the energy-yielding phase, creates the energy that is the product of glycolysis.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase converts each three-carbon glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate produced
during the energy-consuming phase into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This reaction releases an electron that is then
picked up by NAD+ to create an NADH molecule. NADH is a high-energy molecule, like ATP, but unlike ATP, it is not
used as energy currency by the cell. Because there are two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules, two NADH
molecules are synthesized during this step. Each 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is subsequently dephosphorylated (i.e., a
phosphate is removed) by phosphoglycerate kinase into 3-phosphoglycerate. Each phosphate released in this
reaction can convert one molecule of ADP into one high-energy ATP molecule, resulting in a gain of two ATP
molecules.
The enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase then converts the 3-phosphoglycerate molecules into 2-phosphoglycerate.
The enolase enzyme then acts upon the 2-phosphoglycerate molecules to convert them into phosphoenolpyruvate
molecules. The last step of glycolysis involves the dephosphorylation of the two phosphoenolpyruvate molecules by
pyruvate kinase to create two pyruvate molecules and two ATP molecules.
In summary, one glucose molecule breaks down into two pyruvate molecules, and creates two net ATP molecules
1066
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
and two NADH molecules by glycolysis. Therefore, glycolysis generates energy for the cell and creates pyruvate
molecules that can be processed further through the aerobic Krebs cycle (also called the citric acid cycle or
tricarboxylic acid cycle); converted into lactic acid or alcohol (in yeast) by fermentation; or used later for the
synthesis of glucose through gluconeogenesis.
Anaerobic Respiration
When oxygen is limited or absent, pyruvate enters an anaerobic pathway called fermentation. In these reactions,
pyruvate can be converted into lactic acid. In addition to generating an additional ATP, this pathway serves to keep
the pyruvate concentration low so glycolysis continues, and it oxidizes NADH into the NAD+ needed by glycolysis. In
this reaction, lactic acid replaces oxygen as the final electron acceptor. Anaerobic respiration occurs in most cells of
the body when oxygen is limited or mitochondria are absent or nonfunctional. For example, because erythrocytes
(red blood cells) lack mitochondria, they must produce their ATP from anaerobic respiration. This is an effective
pathway of ATP production for short periods of time, ranging from seconds to a few minutes. The lactic acid
produced diffuses into the plasma and is carried to the liver, where it is converted back into pyruvate or glucose via
the Cori cycle. Similarly, when a person exercises, muscles use ATP faster than oxygen can be delivered to them.
They depend on glycolysis and lactic acid production for rapid ATP production.
Aerobic Respiration
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate can enter the Krebs cycle where additional energy is extracted as electrons are
transferred from the pyruvate to the receptors NAD+, GDP, and FAD, with carbon dioxide being a “waste product”
(Figure 24.6). The NADH and FADH2 pass electrons on to the electron transport chain, which uses the transferred
energy to produce ATP. As the terminal step in the electron transport chain, oxygen is the terminal electron
acceptor and creates water inside the mitochondria.
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1067
FIGURE 24.6
Aerobic versus Anaerobic Respiration
The process of anaerobic respiration converts glucose into two lactate molecules
in the absence of oxygen or within erythrocytes that lack mitochondria. During aerobic respiration, glucose is oxidized into two pyruvate
molecules.
Krebs Cycle/Citric Acid Cycle/Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle
The pyruvate molecules generated during glycolysis are transported across the mitochondrial membrane into the
1068
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
inner mitochondrial matrix, where they are metabolized by enzymes in a pathway called the Krebs cycle (Figure
24.7). The Krebs cycle is also commonly called the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. During the
Krebs cycle, high-energy molecules, including ATP, NADH, and FADH2, are created. NADH and FADH2 then pass
electrons through the electron transport chain in the mitochondria to generate more ATP molecules.
FIGURE 24.7
Krebs Cycle
During the Krebs cycle, each pyruvate that is generated by glycolysis is converted into a two-carbon acetyl
CoA molecule. The acetyl CoA is systematically processed through the cycle and produces high-energy NADH, FADH2, and ATP molecules.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/krebscycle) to observe the Krebs cycle.
The three-carbon pyruvate molecule generated during glycolysis moves from the cytoplasm into the mitochondrial
matrix, where it is converted by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase into a two-carbon acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl
CoA) molecule. This reaction is an oxidative decarboxylation reaction. It converts the three-carbon pyruvate into a
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1069
two-carbon acetyl CoA molecule, releasing carbon dioxide and transferring two electrons that combine with NAD+ to
form NADH. Acetyl CoA enters the Krebs cycle by combining with a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form the
six-carbon molecule citrate, or citric acid, at the same time releasing the coenzyme A molecule.
The six-carbon citrate molecule is systematically converted to a five-carbon molecule and then a four-carbon
molecule, ending with oxaloacetate, the beginning of the cycle. Along the way, each citrate molecule will produce
one ATP, one FADH2, and three NADH. The FADH2 and NADH will enter the oxidative phosphorylation system
located in the inner mitochondrial membrane. In addition, the Krebs cycle supplies the starting materials to process
and break down proteins and fats.
To start the Krebs cycle, citrate synthase combines acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate to form a six-carbon citrate
molecule; CoA is subsequently released and can combine with another pyruvate molecule to begin the cycle again.
The aconitase enzyme converts citrate into isocitrate. In two successive steps of oxidative decarboxylation, two
molecules of CO2 and two NADH molecules are produced when isocitrate dehydrogenase converts isocitrate into
the five-carbon α-ketoglutarate, which is then catalyzed and converted into the four-carbon succinyl CoA by α-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. The enzyme succinyl CoA dehydrogenase then converts succinyl CoA into succinate
and forms the high-energy molecule GTP, which transfers its energy to ADP to produce ATP. Succinate
dehydrogenase then converts succinate into fumarate, forming a molecule of FADH2. Fumarase then converts
fumarate into malate, which malate dehydrogenase then converts back into oxaloacetate while reducing NAD+ to
NADH. Oxaloacetate is then ready to combine with the next acetyl CoA to start the Krebs cycle again (see Figure
24.7). For each turn of the cycle, three NADH, one ATP (through GTP), and one FADH2 are created. Each carbon of
pyruvate is converted into CO2, which is released as a byproduct of oxidative (aerobic) respiration.
Oxidative Phosphorylation and the Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain (ETC) uses the NADH and FADH2 produced by the Krebs cycle to generate ATP.
Electrons from NADH and FADH2 are transferred through protein complexes embedded in the inner mitochondrial
membrane by a series of enzymatic reactions. The electron transport chain consists of a series of four enzyme
complexes (Complex I – Complex IV) and two coenzymes (ubiquinone and Cytochrome c), which act as electron
carriers and proton pumps used to transfer H+ ions into the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial
membranes (Figure 24.8). The ETC couples the transfer of electrons between a donor (like NADH) and an electron
acceptor (like O2) with the transfer of protons (H+ ions) across the inner mitochondrial membrane, enabling the
process of oxidative phosphorylation. In the presence of oxygen, energy is passed, stepwise, through the electron
carriers to collect gradually the energy needed to attach a phosphate to ADP and produce ATP. The role of molecular
oxygen, O2, is as the terminal electron acceptor for the ETC. This means that once the electrons have passed
through the entire ETC, they must be passed to another, separate molecule. These electrons, O2, and H+ ions from
the matrix combine to form new water molecules. This is the basis for your need to breathe in oxygen. Without
oxygen, electron flow through the ETC ceases.
1070
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 24.8
Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain is a series of electron carriers and ion pumps that are used to
pump H+ ions out of the inner mitochondrial matrix.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ETchain) to learn about the electron transport chain.
The electrons released from NADH and FADH2 are passed along the chain by each of the carriers, which are reduced
when they receive the electron and oxidized when passing it on to the next carrier. Each of these reactions releases
a small amount of energy, which is used to pump H+ ions across the inner membrane. The accumulation of these
protons in the space between the membranes creates a proton gradient with respect to the mitochondrial matrix.
Also embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane is an amazing protein pore complex called ATP synthase.
Effectively, it is a turbine that is powered by the flow of H+ ions across the inner membrane down a gradient and into
the mitochondrial matrix. As the H+ ions traverse the complex, the shaft of the complex rotates. This rotation
enables other portions of ATP synthase to encourage ADP and Pi to create ATP. In accounting for the total number of
ATP produced per glucose molecule through aerobic respiration, it is important to remember the following points:
•
A net of two ATP are produced through glycolysis (four produced and two consumed during the energy-
consuming stage). However, these two ATP are used for transporting the NADH produced during glycolysis from
the cytoplasm into the mitochondria. Therefore, the net production of ATP during glycolysis is zero.
•
In all phases after glycolysis, the number of ATP, NADH, and FADH2 produced must be multiplied by two to
reflect how each glucose molecule produces two pyruvate molecules.
•
In the ETC, about three ATP are produced for every oxidized NADH. However, only about two ATP are produced
for every oxidized FADH2. The electrons from FADH2 produce less ATP, because they start at a lower point in the
ETC (Complex II) compared to the electrons from NADH (Complex I) (see Figure 24.8).
Therefore, for every glucose molecule that enters aerobic respiration, a net total of 36 ATPs are produced (Figure
24.9).
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1071
FIGURE 24.9
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism involves glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and the electron transport
chain.
Gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of new glucose molecules from pyruvate, lactate, glycerol, or the amino acids
alanine or glutamine. This process takes place primarily in the liver during periods of low glucose, that is, under
conditions of fasting, starvation, and low carbohydrate diets. So, the question can be raised as to why the body
would create something it has just spent a fair amount of effort to break down? Certain key organs, including the
brain, can use only glucose as an energy source; therefore, it is essential that the body maintain a minimum blood
glucose concentration. When the blood glucose concentration falls below that certain point, new glucose is
synthesized by the liver to raise the blood concentration to normal.
1072
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Gluconeogenesis is not simply the reverse of glycolysis. There are some important differences (Figure 24.10).
Pyruvate is a common starting material for gluconeogenesis. First, the pyruvate is converted into oxaloacetate.
Oxaloacetate then serves as a substrate for the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), which
transforms oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). From this step, gluconeogenesis is nearly the reverse of
glycolysis. PEP is converted back into 2-phosphoglycerate, which is converted into 3-phosphoglycerate. Then,
3-phosphoglycerate is converted into 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate and then into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Two
molecules of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate then combine to form fructose-1-6-bisphosphate, which is converted
into fructose 6-phosphate and then into glucose-6-phosphate. Finally, a series of reactions generates glucose itself.
In gluconeogenesis (as compared to glycolysis), the enzyme hexokinase is replaced by glucose-6-phosphatase, and
the enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 is replaced by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. This helps the cell to regulate
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis independently of each other.
As will be discussed as part of lipolysis, fats can be broken down into glycerol, which can be phosphorylated to form
dihydroxyacetone phosphate or DHAP. DHAP can either enter the glycolytic pathway or be used by the liver as a
substrate for gluconeogenesis.
24.2 • Carbohydrate Metabolism
1073
FIGURE 24.10
Gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from pyruvate, lactate, glycerol, alanine, or glutamate.
1074
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
24.3 Lipid Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how energy can be derived from fat
•
Explain the purpose and process of ketogenesis
•
Describe the process of ketone body oxidation
•
Explain the purpose and the process of lipogenesis
Fats (or triglycerides) within the body are ingested as food or synthesized by adipocytes or hepatocytes from
carbohydrate precursors (Figure 24.11). Lipid metabolism entails the oxidation of fatty acids to either generate
energy or synthesize new lipids from smaller constituent molecules. Lipid metabolism is associated with
carbohydrate metabolism, as products of glucose (such as acetyl CoA) can be converted into lipids.
Aging and the...
Body’s Metabolic Rate
The human body’s metabolic rate decreases nearly 2 percent per decade after age 30. Changes in body
composition, including reduced lean muscle mass, are mostly responsible for this decrease. The most dramatic
loss of muscle mass, and consequential decline in metabolic rate, occurs between 50 and 70 years of age. Loss
of muscle mass is the equivalent of reduced strength, which tends to inhibit seniors from engaging in sufficient
physical activity. This results in a positive-feedback system where the reduced physical activity leads to even
more muscle loss, further reducing metabolism.
There are several things that can be done to help prevent general declines in metabolism and to fight back
against the cyclic nature of these declines. These include eating breakfast, eating small meals frequently,
consuming plenty of lean protein, drinking water to remain hydrated, exercising (including strength training), and
getting enough sleep. These measures can help keep energy levels from dropping and curb the urge for
increased calorie consumption from excessive snacking. While these strategies are not guaranteed to maintain
metabolism, they do help prevent muscle loss and may increase energy levels. Some experts also suggest
avoiding sugar, which can lead to excess fat storage. Spicy foods and green tea might also be beneficial. Because
stress activates cortisol release, and cortisol slows metabolism, avoiding stress, or at least practicing relaxation
techniques, can also help.
24.3 • Lipid Metabolism
1075
FIGURE 24.11
Triglyceride Broken Down into a Monoglyceride
A triglyceride molecule (a) breaks down into a monoglyceride (b).
Lipid metabolism begins in the intestine where ingested triglycerides are broken down into smaller chain fatty acids
and subsequently into monoglyceride molecules (see Figure 24.11b) by pancreatic lipases, enzymes that break
down fats after they are emulsified by bile salts. When food reaches the small intestine in the form of chyme, a
digestive hormone called cholecystokinin (CCK) is released by intestinal cells in the intestinal mucosa. CCK
stimulates the release of pancreatic lipase from the pancreas and stimulates the contraction of the gallbladder to
release stored bile salts into the intestine. CCK also travels to the brain, where it can act as a hunger suppressant.
Together, the pancreatic lipases and bile salts break down triglycerides into free fatty acids. These fatty acids can be
transported across the intestinal membrane. However, once they cross the membrane, they are recombined to again
form triglyceride molecules. Within the intestinal cells, these triglycerides are packaged along with cholesterol
molecules in phospholipid vesicles called chylomicrons (Figure 24.12). The chylomicrons enable fats and
cholesterol to move within the aqueous environment of your lymphatic and circulatory systems. Chylomicrons leave
the enterocytes by exocytosis and enter the lymphatic system via lacteals in the villi of the intestine. From the
lymphatic system, the chylomicrons are transported to the circulatory system. Once in the circulation, they can
either go to the liver or be stored in fat cells (adipocytes) that comprise adipose (fat) tissue found throughout the
body.
1076
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 24.12
Chylomicrons
Chylomicrons contain triglycerides, cholesterol molecules, and other apolipoproteins (protein molecules).
They function to carry these water-insoluble molecules from the intestine, through the lymphatic system, and into the bloodstream, which
carries the lipids to adipose tissue for storage.
Lipolysis
To obtain energy from fat, triglycerides must first be broken down by hydrolysis into their two principal components,
fatty acids and glycerol. This process, called lipolysis, takes place in the cytoplasm. The resulting fatty acids are
oxidized by β-oxidation into acetyl CoA, which is used by the Krebs cycle. The glycerol that is released from
triglycerides after lipolysis directly enters the glycolysis pathway as DHAP. Because one triglyceride molecule yields
three fatty acid molecules with as much as 16 or more carbons in each one, fat molecules yield more energy than
carbohydrates and are an important source of energy for the human body. Triglycerides yield more than twice the
energy per unit mass when compared to carbohydrates and proteins. Therefore, when glucose levels are low,
triglycerides can be converted into acetyl CoA molecules and used to generate ATP through aerobic respiration.
The breakdown of fatty acids, called fatty acid oxidation or beta (β)-oxidation, begins in the cytoplasm, where fatty
acids are converted into fatty acyl CoA molecules. This fatty acyl CoA combines with carnitine to create a fatty acyl
carnitine molecule, which helps to transport the fatty acid across the mitochondrial membrane. Once inside the
mitochondrial matrix, the fatty acyl carnitine molecule is converted back into fatty acyl CoA and then into acetyl CoA
(Figure 24.13). The newly formed acetyl CoA enters the Krebs cycle and is used to produce ATP in the same way as
acetyl CoA derived from pyruvate.
24.3 • Lipid Metabolism
1077
FIGURE 24.13
Breakdown of Fatty Acids
During fatty acid oxidation, triglycerides can be broken down into acetyl CoA molecules and
1078
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
used for energy when glucose levels are low.
Ketogenesis
If excessive acetyl CoA is created from the oxidation of fatty acids and the Krebs cycle is overloaded and cannot
handle it, the acetyl CoA is diverted to create ketone bodies. These ketone bodies can serve as a fuel source if
glucose levels are too low in the body. Ketones serve as fuel in times of prolonged starvation or when patients suffer
from uncontrolled diabetes and cannot utilize most of the circulating glucose. In both cases, fat stores are liberated
to generate energy through the Krebs cycle and will generate ketone bodies when too much acetyl CoA
accumulates.
In this ketone synthesis reaction, excess acetyl CoA is converted into hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA). HMG
CoA is a precursor of cholesterol and is an intermediate that is subsequently converted into β-hydroxybutyrate, the
primary ketone body in the blood (Figure 24.14).
FIGURE 24.14
Ketogenesis
Excess acetyl CoA is diverted from the Krebs cycle to the ketogenesis pathway. This reaction occurs in the
mitochondria of liver cells. The result is the production of β-hydroxybutyrate, the primary ketone body found in the blood.
Ketone Body Oxidation
Organs that have classically been thought to be dependent solely on glucose, such as the brain, can actually use
ketones as an alternative energy source. This keeps the brain functioning when glucose is limited. When ketones are
produced faster than they can be used, they can be broken down into CO2 and acetone. The acetone is removed by
exhalation. One symptom of ketogenesis is that the patient’s breath smells sweet like alcohol. This effect provides
one way of telling if a person with diabetes is properly controlling the disease. The carbon dioxide produced can
acidify the blood, leading to diabetic ketoacidosis, a dangerous condition in people with diabetes.
Ketones oxidize to produce energy for the brain. beta (β)-hydroxybutyrate is oxidized to acetoacetate and NADH is
released. An HS-CoA molecule is added to acetoacetate, forming acetoacetyl CoA. The carbon within the
acetoacetyl CoA that is not bonded to the CoA then detaches, splitting the molecule in two. This carbon then
attaches to another free HS-CoA, resulting in two acetyl CoA molecules. These two acetyl CoA molecules are then
processed through the Krebs cycle to generate energy (Figure 24.15).
24.3 • Lipid Metabolism
1079
FIGURE 24.15
Ketone Oxidation
When glucose is limited, ketone bodies can be oxidized to produce acetyl CoA to be used in the Krebs
cycle to generate energy.
Lipogenesis
When glucose levels are plentiful, the excess acetyl CoA generated by glycolysis can be converted into fatty acids,
triglycerides, cholesterol, steroids, and bile salts. This process, called lipogenesis, creates lipids (fat) from the
acetyl CoA and takes place in the cytoplasm of adipocytes (fat cells) and hepatocytes (liver cells). When you eat
more glucose or carbohydrates than your body needs, your system uses acetyl CoA to turn the excess into fat.
Although there are several metabolic sources of acetyl CoA, it is most commonly derived from glycolysis. Acetyl CoA
availability is significant, because it initiates lipogenesis. Lipogenesis begins with acetyl CoA and advances by the
subsequent addition of two carbon atoms from another acetyl CoA; this process is repeated until fatty acids are the
appropriate length. Because this is a bond-creating anabolic process, ATP is consumed. However, the creation of
triglycerides and lipids is an efficient way of storing the energy available in carbohydrates. Triglycerides and lipids,
high-energy molecules, are stored in adipose tissue until they are needed.
Although lipogenesis occurs in the cytoplasm, the necessary acetyl CoA is created in the mitochondria and cannot
be transported across the mitochondrial membrane. To solve this problem, pyruvate is converted into both
oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA. Two different enzymes are required for these conversions. Oxaloacetate forms via the
action of pyruvate carboxylase, whereas the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase creates acetyl CoA. Oxaloacetate
and acetyl CoA combine to form citrate, which can cross the mitochondrial membrane and enter the cytoplasm. In
the cytoplasm, citrate is converted back into oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA. Oxaloacetate is converted into malate
and then into pyruvate. Pyruvate crosses back across the mitochondrial membrane to wait for the next cycle of
lipogenesis. The acetyl CoA is converted into malonyl CoA that is used to synthesize fatty acids. Figure 24.16
summarizes the pathways of lipid metabolism.
1080
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 24.16
Lipid Metabolism
Lipids may follow one of several pathways during metabolism. Glycerol and fatty acids follow different
pathways.
24.4 Protein Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe how the body digests proteins
•
Explain how the urea cycle prevents toxic concentrations of nitrogen
•
Differentiate between glucogenic and ketogenic amino acids
•
Explain how protein can be used for energy
Much of the body is made of protein, and these proteins take on a myriad of forms. They represent cell signaling
receptors, signaling molecules, structural members, enzymes, intracellular trafficking components, extracellular
matrix scaffolds, ion pumps, ion channels, oxygen and CO2 transporters (hemoglobin). That is not even the complete
list! There is protein in bones (collagen), muscles, and tendons; the hemoglobin that transports oxygen; and
enzymes that catalyze all biochemical reactions. Protein is also used for growth and repair. Amid all these necessary
functions, proteins also hold the potential to serve as a metabolic fuel source. Proteins are not stored for later use,
so excess proteins must be converted into glucose or triglycerides, and used to supply energy or build energy
reserves. Although the body can synthesize proteins from amino acids, food is an important source of those amino
acids, especially because humans cannot synthesize all of the 20 amino acids used to build proteins.
24.4 • Protein Metabolism
1081
The digestion of proteins begins in the stomach. When protein-rich foods enter the stomach, they are greeted by a
mixture of the enzyme pepsin and hydrochloric acid (HCl; 0.5 percent). The latter produces an environmental pH of
1.5–3.5 that denatures proteins within food. Pepsin cuts proteins into smaller polypeptides and their constituent
amino acids. When the food-gastric juice mixture (chyme) enters the small intestine, the pancreas releases sodium
bicarbonate to neutralize the HCl. This helps to protect the lining of the intestine. The small intestine also releases
digestive hormones, including secretin and CCK, which stimulate digestive processes to break down the proteins
further. Secretin also stimulates the pancreas to release sodium bicarbonate. The pancreas releases most of the
digestive enzymes, including the proteases trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase, which aid protein digestion.
Together, all of these enzymes break complex proteins into smaller individual amino acids (Figure 24.17), which are
then transported across the intestinal mucosa to be used to create new proteins, or to be converted into fats or
acetyl CoA and used in the Krebs cycle.
FIGURE 24.17
Digestive Enzymes and Hormones
Enzymes in the stomach and small intestine break down proteins into amino acids.
HCl in the stomach aids in proteolysis, and hormones secreted by intestinal cells direct the digestive processes.
In order to avoid breaking down the proteins that make up the pancreas and small intestine, pancreatic enzymes are
released as inactive proenzymes that are only activated in the small intestine. In the pancreas, vesicles store
trypsin and chymotrypsin as trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen. Once released into the small intestine, an
enzyme found in the wall of the small intestine, called enterokinase, binds to trypsinogen and converts it into its
active form, trypsin. Trypsin then binds to chymotrypsinogen to convert it into the active chymotrypsin. Trypsin and
chymotrypsin break down large proteins into smaller peptides, a process called proteolysis. These smaller peptides
are catabolized into their constituent amino acids, which are transported across the apical surface of the intestinal
mucosa in a process that is mediated by sodium-amino acid transporters. These transporters bind sodium and then
bind the amino acid to transport it across the membrane. At the basal surface of the mucosal cells, the sodium and
amino acid are released. The sodium can be reused in the transporter, whereas the amino acids are transferred into
the bloodstream to be transported to the liver and cells throughout the body for protein synthesis.
Freely available amino acids are used to create proteins. If amino acids exist in excess, the body has no capacity or
mechanism for their storage; thus, they are converted into glucose or ketones, or they are decomposed. Amino acid
decomposition results in hydrocarbons and nitrogenous waste. However, high concentrations of nitrogenous
byproducts are toxic. The urea cycle processes nitrogen and facilitates its excretion from the body.
1082
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Urea Cycle
The urea cycle is a set of biochemical reactions that produces urea from ammonium ions in order to prevent a toxic
level of ammonium in the body. It occurs primarily in the liver and, to a lesser extent, in the kidney. Prior to the urea
cycle, ammonium ions are produced from the breakdown of amino acids. In these reactions, an amine group, or
ammonium ion, from the amino acid is exchanged with a keto group on another molecule. This transamination
event creates a molecule that is necessary for the Krebs cycle and an ammonium ion that enters into the urea cycle
to be eliminated.
In the urea cycle, ammonium is combined with CO2, resulting in urea and water. The urea is eliminated through the
kidneys in the urine (Figure 24.18).
24.4 • Protein Metabolism
1083
FIGURE 24.18
Urea Cycle
Nitrogen is transaminated, creating ammonia and intermediates of the Krebs cycle. Ammonia is processed in
the urea cycle to produce urea that is eliminated through the kidneys.
Amino acids can also be used as a source of energy, especially in times of starvation. Because the processing of
amino acids results in the creation of metabolic intermediates, including pyruvate, acetyl CoA, acetoacyl CoA,
oxaloacetate, and α-ketoglutarate, amino acids can serve as a source of energy production through the Krebs cycle
(Figure 24.19). Figure 24.20 summarizes the pathways of catabolism and anabolism for carbohydrates, lipids, and
proteins.
1084
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 24.19
Energy from Amino Acids
Amino acids can be broken down into precursors for glycolysis or the Krebs cycle. Amino
acids (in bold) can enter the cycle through more than one pathway.
24.4 • Protein Metabolism
1085
FIGURE 24.20
Catabolic and Anabolic Pathways
Nutrients follow a complex pathway from ingestion through anabolism and
catabolism to energy production.
Disorders of the...
Metabolism: Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency and Phenylketonuria
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency (PDCD) and phenylketonuria (PKU) are genetic disorders. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase is the enzyme that converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA, the molecule necessary to begin the Krebs
cycle to produce ATP. With low levels of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), the rate of cycling through
the Krebs cycle is dramatically reduced. This results in a decrease in the total amount of energy that is produced
by the cells of the body. PDC deficiency results in a neurodegenerative disease that ranges in severity,
1086
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
24.5 Metabolic States of the Body
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe what defines each of the three metabolic states
•
Describe the processes that occur during the absorptive state of metabolism
•
Describe the processes that occur during the postabsorptive state of metabolism
•
Explain how the body processes glucose when the body is starved of fuel
You eat periodically throughout the day; however, your organs, especially the brain, need a continuous supply of
glucose. How does the body meet this constant demand for energy? Your body processes the food you eat both to
use immediately and, importantly, to store as energy for later demands. If there were no method in place to store
excess energy, you would need to eat constantly in order to meet energy demands. Distinct mechanisms are in place
to facilitate energy storage, and to make stored energy available during times of fasting and starvation.
The Absorptive State
The absorptive state, or the fed state, occurs after a meal when your body is digesting the food and absorbing the
nutrients (anabolism exceeds catabolism). Digestion begins the moment you put food into your mouth, as the food
is broken down into its constituent parts to be absorbed through the intestine. The digestion of carbohydrates
begins in the mouth, whereas the digestion of proteins and fats begins in the stomach and small intestine. The
constituent parts of these carbohydrates, fats, and proteins are transported across the intestinal wall and enter the
bloodstream (sugars and amino acids) or the lymphatic system (fats). From the intestines, these systems transport
them to the liver, adipose tissue, or muscle cells that will process and use, or store, the energy.
Depending on the amounts and types of nutrients ingested, the absorptive state can linger for up to 4 hours. The
ingestion of food and the rise of glucose concentrations in the bloodstream stimulate pancreatic beta cells to
release insulin into the bloodstream, where it initiates the absorption of blood glucose by liver hepatocytes, and by
adipose and muscle cells. Once inside these cells, glucose is immediately converted into glucose-6-phosphate. By
doing this, a concentration gradient is established where glucose levels are higher in the blood than in the cells. This
allows for glucose to continue moving from the blood to the cells where it is needed. Insulin also stimulates the
storage of glucose as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells where it can be used for later energy needs of the body.
Insulin also promotes the synthesis of protein in muscle. As you will see, muscle protein can be catabolized and
used as fuel in times of starvation.
If energy is exerted shortly after eating, the dietary fats and sugars that were just ingested will be processed and
used immediately for energy. If not, the excess glucose is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells, or as fat in
adipose tissue; excess dietary fat is also stored as triglycerides in adipose tissues.
depending on the levels of the PDC enzyme. It may cause developmental defects, muscle spasms, and death.
Treatments can include diet modification, vitamin supplementation, and gene therapy; however, damage to the
central nervous system usually cannot be reversed.
PKU affects about 1 in every 15,000 births in the United States. People afflicted with PKU lack sufficient activity
of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase and are therefore unable to break down phenylalanine into tyrosine
adequately. Because of this, levels of phenylalanine rise to toxic levels in the body, which results in damage to
the central nervous system and brain. Symptoms include delayed neurological development, hyperactivity,
intellectual disability, seizures, rash, tremors, and uncontrolled movements of the arms and legs. Pregnant
people with PKU are at a high risk for exposing the fetus to too much phenylalanine, which can cross the
placenta and affect fetal development. Babies exposed to excess phenylalanine in utero may present with heart
defects, physical and/or intellectual disability, and microcephaly. Every infant in the United States and Canada is
tested at birth to determine whether PKU is present. The earlier a modified diet is begun, the less severe the
symptoms will be. The person must closely follow a strict diet that is low in phenylalanine to avoid symptoms
and damage. Phenylalanine is found in high concentrations in artificial sweeteners, including aspartame.
Therefore, these sweeteners must be avoided. Some animal products and certain starches are also high in
phenylalanine, and intake of these foods should be carefully monitored.
24.5 • Metabolic States of the Body
1087
Figure 24.21 summarizes the metabolic processes occurring in the body during the absorptive state.
FIGURE 24.21
Absorptive State
During the absorptive state, the body digests food and absorbs the nutrients.
The Postabsorptive State
The postabsorptive state, or the fasting state, occurs when the food has been digested, absorbed, and stored. You
commonly fast overnight, but skipping meals during the day puts your body in the postabsorptive state as well.
During this state, the body must rely initially on stored glycogen. Glucose levels in the blood begin to drop as it is
absorbed and used by the cells. In response to the decrease in glucose, insulin levels also drop. Glycogen and
triglyceride storage slows. However, due to the demands of the tissues and organs, blood glucose levels must be
maintained in the normal range of 80–120 mg/dL. In response to a drop in blood glucose concentration, the
hormone glucagon is released from the alpha cells of the pancreas. Glucagon acts upon the liver cells, where it
1088
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
inhibits the synthesis of glycogen and stimulates the breakdown of stored glycogen back into glucose. This glucose
is released from the liver to be used by the peripheral tissues and the brain. As a result, blood glucose levels begin
to rise. Gluconeogenesis will also begin in the liver to replace the glucose that has been used by the peripheral
tissues.
After ingestion of food, fats and proteins are processed as described previously; however, the glucose processing
changes a bit. The peripheral tissues preferentially absorb glucose. The liver, which normally absorbs and processes
glucose, will not do so after a prolonged fast. The gluconeogenesis that has been ongoing in the liver will continue
after fasting to replace the glycogen stores that were depleted in the liver. After these stores have been replenished,
excess glucose that is absorbed by the liver will be converted into triglycerides and fatty acids for long-term storage.
Figure 24.22 summarizes the metabolic processes occurring in the body during the postabsorptive state.
24.5 • Metabolic States of the Body
1089
FIGURE 24.22
Postabsorptive State
During the postabsorptive state, the body must rely on stored glycogen for energy.
Starvation
When the body is deprived of nourishment for an extended period of time, it goes into “survival mode.” The first
priority for survival is to provide enough glucose or fuel for the brain. The second priority is the conservation of
amino acids for proteins. Therefore, the body uses ketones to satisfy the energy needs of the brain and other
glucose-dependent organs, and to maintain proteins in the cells (see Figure 24.2). Because glucose levels are very
low during starvation, glycolysis will shut off in cells that can use alternative fuels. For example, muscles will switch
from using glucose to fatty acids as fuel. As previously explained, fatty acids can be converted into acetyl CoA and
processed through the Krebs cycle to make ATP. Pyruvate, lactate, and alanine from muscle cells are not converted
1090
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
into acetyl CoA and used in the Krebs cycle, but are exported to the liver to be used in the synthesis of glucose. As
starvation continues, and more glucose is needed, glycerol from fatty acids can be liberated and used as a source
for gluconeogenesis.
After several days of starvation, ketone bodies become the major source of fuel for the heart and other organs. As
starvation continues, fatty acids and triglyceride stores are used to create ketones for the body. This prevents the
continued breakdown of proteins that serve as carbon sources for gluconeogenesis. Once these stores are fully
depleted, proteins from muscles are released and broken down for glucose synthesis. Overall survival is dependent
on the amount of fat and protein stored in the body.
24.6 Energy and Heat Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe how the body regulates temperature
•
Explain the significance of the metabolic rate
The body tightly regulates the body temperature through a process called thermoregulation, in which the body can
maintain its temperature within certain boundaries, even when the surrounding temperature is very different. The
core temperature of the body remains steady at around 36.5–37.5 °C (or 97.7–99.5 °F). In the process of ATP
production by cells throughout the body, approximately 60 percent of the energy produced is in the form of heat
used to maintain body temperature. Thermoregulation is an example of negative feedback.
The hypothalamus in the brain is the master switch that works as a thermostat to regulate the body’s core
temperature (Figure 24.23). If the temperature is too high, the hypothalamus can initiate several processes to lower
it. These include increasing the circulation of the blood to the surface of the body to allow for the dissipation of heat
through the skin and initiation of sweating to allow evaporation of water on the skin to cool its surface. Conversely, if
the temperature falls below the set core temperature, the hypothalamus can initiate shivering to generate heat. The
body uses more energy and generates more heat. In addition, thyroid hormone will stimulate more energy use and
heat production by cells throughout the body. An environment is said to be thermoneutral when the body does not
expend or release energy to maintain its core temperature. For a naked human, this is an ambient air temperature of
around 84 °F. If the temperature is higher, for example, when wearing clothes, the body compensates with cooling
mechanisms. The body loses heat through the mechanisms of heat exchange.
24.6 • Energy and Heat Balance
1091
FIGURE 24.23
Hypothalamus Controls Thermoregulation
The hypothalamus controls thermoregulation.
1092
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Mechanisms of Heat Exchange
When the environment is not thermoneutral, the body uses four mechanisms of heat exchange to maintain
homeostasis: conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation. Each of these mechanisms relies on the property
of heat to flow from a higher concentration to a lower concentration; therefore, each of the mechanisms of heat
exchange varies in rate according to the temperature and conditions of the environment.
Conduction is the transfer of heat by two objects that are in direct contact with one another. It occurs when the skin
comes in contact with a cold or warm object. For example, when holding a glass of ice water, the heat from your skin
will warm the glass and in turn melt the ice. Alternatively, on a cold day, you might warm up by wrapping your cold
hands around a hot mug of coffee. Only about 3 percent of the body’s heat is lost through conduction.
Convection is the transfer of heat to the air surrounding the skin. The warmed air rises away from the body and is
replaced by cooler air that is subsequently heated. Convection can also occur in water. When the water temperature
is lower than the body’s temperature, the body loses heat by warming the water closest to the skin, which moves
away to be replaced by cooler water. The convection currents created by the temperature changes continue to draw
heat away from the body more quickly than the body can replace it, resulting in hyperthermia. About 15 percent of
the body’s heat is lost through convection.
Radiation is the transfer of heat via infrared waves. This occurs between any two objects when their temperatures
differ. A radiator can warm a room via radiant heat. On a sunny day, the radiation from the sun warms the skin. The
same principle works from the body to the environment. About 60 percent of the heat lost by the body is lost
through radiation.
Evaporation is the transfer of heat by the evaporation of water. Because it takes a great deal of energy for a water
molecule to change from a liquid to a gas, evaporating water (in the form of sweat) takes with it a great deal of
energy from the skin. However, the rate at which evaporation occurs depends on relative humidity—more sweat
evaporates in lower humidity environments. Sweating is the primary means of cooling the body during exercise,
whereas at rest, about 20 percent of the heat lost by the body occurs through evaporation.
Metabolic Rate
The metabolic rate is the amount of energy consumed minus the amount of energy expended by the body. The
basal metabolic rate (BMR) describes the amount of daily energy expended by humans at rest, in a neutrally
temperate environment, while in the postabsorptive state. It measures how much energy the body needs for
normal, basic, daily activity. About 70 percent of all daily energy expenditure comes from the basic functions of the
organs in the body. Another 20 percent comes from physical activity, and the remaining 10 percent is necessary for
body thermoregulation or temperature control. This rate will be higher if a person is more active or has more lean
body mass. As you age, the BMR generally decreases as the percentage of less lean muscle mass decreases.
24.7 Nutrition and Diet
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how different foods can affect metabolism
•
Describe a healthy diet, as recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
•
List reasons why vitamins and minerals are critical to a healthy diet
The carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins in the foods you eat are used for energy to power molecular, cellular, and
organ system activities. Importantly, the energy is stored primarily as fats. The quantity and quality of food that is
ingested, digested, and absorbed affects the amount of fat that is stored as excess calories. Diet—both what you eat
and how much you eat—has a dramatic impact on your health. Eating too much or too little food can lead to serious
medical issues, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, anorexia, and diabetes, among others. Combine an
unhealthy diet with unhealthy environmental conditions, such as smoking, and the potential medical complications
increase significantly.
Food and Metabolism
The amount of energy that is needed or ingested per day is measured in calories. The nutritional Calorie (C) is the
24.7 • Nutrition and Diet
1093
amount of heat it takes to raise 1 kg (1000 g) of water by 1 °C. This is different from the calorie (c) used in the
physical sciences, which is the amount of heat it takes to raise 1 g of water by 1 °C. When we refer to "calorie," we
are referring to the nutritional Calorie.
On average, a person needs 1500 to 2000 calories per day to sustain (or carry out) daily activities. The total number
of calories needed by one person is dependent on their body mass, age, height, gender, activity level, and the
amount of exercise per day. If exercise is regular part of one’s day, more calories are required. As a rule, people
underestimate the number of calories ingested and overestimate the amount they burn through exercise. This can
lead to ingestion of too many calories per day. The accumulation of an extra 3500 calories adds one pound of
weight. If an excess of 200 calories per day is ingested, one extra pound of body weight will be gained every 18
days. At that rate, an extra 20 pounds can be gained over the course of a year. Of course, this increase in calories
could be offset by increased exercise. Running or jogging one mile burns almost 100 calories.
The type of food ingested also affects the body’s metabolic rate. Processing of carbohydrates requires less energy
than processing of proteins. In fact, the breakdown of carbohydrates requires the least amount of energy, whereas
the processing of proteins demands the most energy. In general, the amount of calories ingested and the amount of
calories burned determines the overall weight. To lose weight, the number of calories burned per day must exceed
the number ingested. Calories are in almost everything you ingest, so when considering calorie intake, beverages
must also be considered.
To help provide guidelines regarding the types and quantities of food that should be eaten every day, the USDA has
updated their food guidelines from MyPyramid to MyPlate. They have put the recommended elements of a healthy
meal into the context of a place setting of food. MyPlate categorizes food into the standard six food groups: fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, dairy, and oils. The accompanying website gives clear recommendations regarding
quantity and type of each food that you should consume each day, as well as identifying which foods belong in each
category. The accompanying graphic (Figure 24.24) gives a clear visual with general recommendations for a healthy
and balanced meal. The guidelines recommend to “Make half your plate fruits and vegetables.” The other half is
grains and protein, with a slightly higher quantity of grains than protein. Dairy products are represented by a drink,
but the quantity can be applied to other dairy products as well.
FIGURE 24.24
MyPlate
The U.S. Department of Agriculture developed food guidelines called MyPlate to help demonstrate how to
maintain a healthy lifestyle.
ChooseMyPlate.gov provides extensive online resources for planning a healthy diet and lifestyle, including offering
weight management tips and recommendations for physical activity. It also includes the SuperTracker, a web-based
application to help you analyze your own diet and physical activity.
1094
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Vitamins
Vitamins are organic compounds found in foods and are a necessary part of the biochemical reactions in the body.
They are involved in a number of processes, including mineral and bone metabolism, and cell and tissue growth, and
they act as cofactors for energy metabolism. The B vitamins play the largest role of any vitamins in metabolism
(Table 24.3 and Table 24.4).
You get most of your vitamins through your diet, although some can be formed from the precursors absorbed during
digestion. For example, the body synthesizes vitamin A from the β-carotene in orange vegetables like carrots and
sweet potatoes. Vitamins are either fat-soluble or water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, are absorbed
through the intestinal tract with lipids in chylomicrons. Vitamin D is also synthesized in the skin through exposure to
sunlight. Because they are carried in lipids, fat-soluble vitamins can accumulate in the lipids stored in the body. If
excess vitamins are retained in the lipid stores in the body, hypervitaminosis can result.
Water-soluble vitamins, including the eight B vitamins and vitamin C, are absorbed with water in the gastrointestinal
tract. These vitamins move easily through bodily fluids, which are water based, so they are not stored in the body.
Excess water-soluble vitamins are excreted in the urine. Therefore, hypervitaminosis of water-soluble vitamins
rarely occurs, except with an excess of vitamin supplements.
Everyday Connection
Metabolism and Obesity
Obesity in the United States is epidemic. The rate of obesity has been steadily rising since the 1980s. In the
1990s, most states reported that less than 10 percent of their populations was obese, and the state with the
highest rate reported that only 15 percent of their population was considered obese. By 2010, the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention reported that nearly 36 percent of adults over 20 years old were obese and
an additional 33 percent were overweight, leaving only about 30 percent of the population at a healthy weight.
These studies find the highest levels of obesity are concentrated in the southern states. They also find the level
of childhood obesity is rising.
Obesity is defined by the body mass index (BMI), which is a measure of a person's weight in kilograms divided
by height in meters squared. The normal, or healthy, BMI range is between 18 and 24.9 kg/m2. Overweight is
defined as a BMI of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2, and obesity is considered to be a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2. Obesity can
arise from a number of factors, including overeating, poor diet, sedentary lifestyle, limited sleep, genetic factors,
and even diseases or drugs. Severe obesity (morbid obesity) or long-term obesity can result in serious medical
conditions, including coronary heart disease; type 2 diabetes; endometrial, breast, or colon cancer;
hypertension (high blood pressure); dyslipidemia (high cholesterol or elevated triglycerides); stroke; liver
disease; gall bladder disease; sleep apnea or respiratory diseases; osteoarthritis; and infertility. Research has
shown that losing weight can help reduce or reverse the complications associated with these conditions.
24.7 • Nutrition and Diet
1095
Fat-soluble Vitamins
Vitamin and
alternative
name
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated with
deficiency
A
retinal or β-
carotene
Yellow and orange
fruits and
vegetables, dark
green leafy
vegetables, eggs,
milk, liver
700–900 µg
Eye and bone
development,
immune
function
Night blindness, epithelial
changes, immune system
deficiency
D
cholecalciferol
Dairy products, egg
yolks; also
synthesized in the
skin from exposure
to sunlight
5–15 µg
Aids in
calcium
absorption,
promoting
bone growth
Rickets, bone pain, muscle
weakness, increased risk of death
from cardiovascular disease,
cognitive impairment, asthma in
children, cancer
E
tocopherols
Seeds, nuts,
vegetable oils,
avocados, wheat
germ
15 mg
Antioxidant
Anemia
K
phylloquinone
Dark green leafy
vegetables, broccoli,
Brussels sprouts,
cabbage
90–120 µg
Blood
clotting, bone
health
Hemorrhagic disease of newborn in
infants; uncommon in adults
TABLE 24.3
Water-soluble Vitamins
Vitamin and
alternative
name
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated
with deficiency
B1
thiamine
Whole grains,
enriched bread and
cereals, milk, meat
1.1–1.2 mg
Carbohydrate
metabolism
Beriberi, Wernicke-
Korsakoff syndrome
B2
riboflavin
Brewer’s yeast,
almonds, milk, organ
meats, legumes,
enriched breads and
cereals, broccoli,
asparagus
1.1–1.3 mg
Synthesis of FAD
for metabolism,
production of red
blood cells
Fatigue, slowed growth,
digestive problems, light
sensitivity, epithelial
problems like cracks in the
corners of the mouth
TABLE 24.4
1096
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Vitamin and
alternative
name
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated
with deficiency
B3
niacin
Meat, fish, poultry,
enriched breads and
cereals, peanuts
14–16 mg
Synthesis of NAD,
nerve function,
cholesterol
production
Cracked, scaly skin;
dementia; diarrhea; also
known as pellagra
B5
pantothenic
acid
Meat, poultry,
potatoes, oats,
enriched breads and
cereals, tomatoes
5 mg
Synthesis of
coenzyme A in
fatty acid
metabolism
Rare: symptoms may
include fatigue, insomnia,
depression, irritability
B6
pyridoxine
Potatoes, bananas,
beans, seeds, nuts,
meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, dark green leafy
vegetables, soy,
organ meats
1.3–1.5 mg
Sodium and
potassium
balance, red blood
cell synthesis,
protein
metabolism
Confusion, irritability,
depression, mouth and
tongue sores
B7
biotin
Liver, fruits, meats
30 µg
Cell growth,
metabolism of
fatty acids,
production of
blood cells
Rare in developed
countries; symptoms
include dermatitis, hair
loss, loss of muscular
coordination
B9
folic acid
Liver, legumes, dark
green leafy
vegetables, enriched
breads and cereals,
citrus fruits
400 µg
DNA/protein
synthesis
Poor growth, gingivitis,
appetite loss, shortness of
breath, gastrointestinal
problems, mental deficits
B12
cyanocobalamin
Fish, meat, poultry,
dairy products, eggs
2.4 µg
Fatty acid
oxidation, nerve
cell function, red
blood cell
production
Pernicious anemia,
leading to nerve cell
damage
C
ascorbic acid
Citrus fruits, red
berries, peppers,
tomatoes, broccoli,
dark green leafy
vegetables
75–90 mg
Necessary to
produce collagen
for formation of
connective tissue
and teeth, and for
wound healing
Dry hair, gingivitis,
bleeding gums, dry and
scaly skin, slow wound
healing, easy bruising,
compromised immunity;
can lead to scurvy
TABLE 24.4
Minerals
Minerals in food are inorganic compounds that work with other nutrients to ensure the body functions properly.
Minerals cannot be made in the body; they come from the diet. The amount of minerals in the body is small—only 4
percent of the total body mass—and most of that consists of the minerals that the body requires in moderate
24.7 • Nutrition and Diet
1097
quantities: potassium, sodium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and chloride.
The most common minerals in the body are calcium and phosphorous, both of which are stored in the skeleton and
necessary for the hardening of bones. Most minerals are ionized, and their ionic forms are used in physiological
processes throughout the body. Sodium and chloride ions are electrolytes in the blood and extracellular tissues, and
iron ions are critical to the formation of hemoglobin. There are additional trace minerals that are still important to
the body’s functions, but their required quantities are much lower.
Like vitamins, minerals can be consumed in toxic quantities (although it is rare). A healthy diet includes most of the
minerals your body requires, so supplements and processed foods can add potentially toxic levels of minerals. Table
24.5 and Table 24.6 provide a summary of minerals and their function in the body.
Major Minerals
Mineral
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated with
deficiency
Potassium
Meats, some fish,
fruits, vegetables,
legumes, dairy
products
4700 mg
Nerve and muscle
function; acts as
an electrolyte
Hypokalemia: weakness,
fatigue, muscle cramping,
gastrointestinal problems,
cardiac problems
Sodium
Table salt, milk, beets,
celery, processed
foods
2300 mg
Blood pressure,
blood volume,
muscle and nerve
function
Rare
Calcium
Dairy products, dark
green leafy
vegetables, blackstrap
molasses, nuts,
brewer’s yeast, some
fish
1000 mg
Bone structure
and health; nerve
and muscle
functions,
especially cardiac
function
Slow growth, weak and
brittle bones
Phosphorous
Meat, milk
700 mg
Bone formation,
metabolism, ATP
production
Rare
Magnesium
Whole grains, nuts,
leafy green vegetables
310–420 mg
Enzyme activation,
production of
energy, regulation
of other nutrients
Agitation, anxiety, sleep
problems, nausea and
vomiting, abnormal heart
rhythms, low blood pressure,
muscular problems
Chloride
Most foods, salt,
vegetables, especially
seaweed, tomatoes,
lettuce, celery, olives
2300 mg
Balance of body
fluids, digestion
Loss of appetite, muscle
cramps
TABLE 24.5
1098
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Trace Minerals
Mineral
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated
with deficiency
Iron
Meat, poultry, fish,
shellfish, legumes,
nuts, seeds, whole
grains, dark leafy
green vegetables
8–18 mg
Transport of oxygen in
blood, production of ATP
Anemia, weakness,
fatigue
Zinc
Meat, fish, poultry,
cheese, shellfish
8–11 mg
Immunity, reproduction,
growth, blood clotting,
insulin and thyroid
function
Loss of appetite, poor
growth, weight loss, skin
problems, hair loss,
vision problems, lack of
taste or smell
Copper
Seafood, organ
meats, nuts,
legumes, chocolate,
enriched breads and
cereals, some fruits
and vegetables
900 µg
Red blood cell
production, nerve and
immune system function,
collagen formation, acts
as an antioxidant
Anemia, low body
temperature, bone
fractures, low white
blood cell
concentration, irregular
heartbeat, thyroid
problems
Iodine
Fish, shellfish, garlic,
lima beans, sesame
seeds, soybeans,
dark leafy green
vegetables
150 µg
Thyroid function
Hypothyroidism: fatigue,
weight gain, dry skin,
temperature sensitivity
Sulfur
Eggs, meat, poultry,
fish, legumes
None
Component of amino
acids
Protein deficiency
Fluoride
Fluoridated water
3–4 mg
Maintenance of bone and
tooth structure
Increased cavities, weak
bones and teeth
Manganese
Nuts, seeds, whole
grains, legumes
1.8–2.3 mg
Formation of connective
tissue and bones, blood
clotting, sex hormone
development,
metabolism, brain and
nerve function
Infertility, bone
malformation,
weakness, seizures
Cobalt
Fish, nuts, leafy
green vegetables,
whole grains
None
Component of B12
None
TABLE 24.6
24.7 • Nutrition and Diet
1099
Mineral
Sources
Recommended
daily
allowance
Function
Problems associated
with deficiency
Selenium
Brewer’s yeast,
wheat germ, liver,
butter, fish, shellfish,
whole grains
55 µg
Antioxidant, thyroid
function, immune system
function
Muscle pain
Chromium
Whole grains, lean
meats, cheese, black
pepper, thyme,
brewer’s yeast
25–35 µg
Insulin function
High blood sugar,
triglyceride, and
cholesterol levels
Molybdenum
Legumes, whole
grains, nuts
45 µg
Cofactor for enzymes
Rare
TABLE 24.6
1100
24 • Metabolism and Nutrition
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
absorptive state
also called the fed state; the
metabolic state occurring during the first few hours
after ingesting food in which the body is digesting
food and absorbing the nutrients
acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA)
starting molecule of
the Krebs cycle
anabolic hormones
hormones that stimulate the
synthesis of new, larger molecules
anabolic reactions
reactions that build smaller
molecules into larger molecules
ATP synthase
protein pore complex that creates ATP
basal metabolic rate (BMR)
amount of energy
expended by the body at rest
beta (β)-hydroxybutyrate
primary ketone body
produced in the body
beta (β)-oxidation
fatty acid oxidation
bile salts
salts that are released from the liver in
response to lipid ingestion and surround the
insoluble triglycerides to aid in their conversion to
monoglycerides and free fatty acids
biosynthesis reactions
reactions that create new
molecules, also called anabolic reactions
body mass index (BMI)
relative amount of body
weight compared to the overall height; a BMI
ranging from 18–24.9 is considered normal weight,
25–29.9 is considered overweight, and greater than
30 is considered obese
calorie
amount of heat it takes to raise 1 kg (1000 g)
of water by 1 °C
catabolic hormones
hormones that stimulate the
breakdown of larger molecules
catabolic reactions
reactions that break down larger
molecules into their constituent parts
cellular respiration
production of ATP from glucose
oxidation via glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and
oxidative phosphorylation
cholecystokinin (CCK)
hormone that stimulates the
release of pancreatic lipase and the contraction of
the gallbladder to release bile salts
chylomicrons
vesicles containing cholesterol and
triglycerides that transport lipids out of the
intestinal cells and into the lymphatic and
circulatory systems
chymotrypsin
pancreatic enzyme that digests protein
chymotrypsinogen
proenzyme that is activated by
trypsin into chymotrypsin
citric acid cycle
also called the Krebs cycle or the
tricarboxylic acid cycle; converts pyruvate into CO2
and high-energy FADH2, NADH, and ATP molecules
conduction
transfer of heat through physical contact
convection
transfer of heat between the skin and air
or water
elastase
pancreatic enzyme that digests protein
electron transport chain (ETC)
ATP production
pathway in which electrons are passed through a
series of oxidation-reduction reactions that forms
water and produces a proton gradient
energy-consuming phase
first phase of glycolysis, in
which two molecules of ATP are necessary to start
the reaction
energy-yielding phase
second phase of glycolysis,
during which energy is produced
enterokinase
enzyme located in the wall of the small
intestine that activates trypsin
evaporation
transfer of heat that occurs when water
changes from a liquid to a gas
FADH2
high-energy molecule needed for glycolysis
fatty acid oxidation
breakdown of fatty acids into
smaller chain fatty acids and acetyl CoA
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
coenzyme used to
produce FADH2
glucokinase
cellular enzyme, found in the liver, which
converts glucose into glucose-6-phosphate upon
uptake into the cell
gluconeogenesis
process of glucose synthesis from
pyruvate or other molecules
glucose-6-phosphate
phosphorylated glucose
produced in the first step of glycolysis
glycogen
form that glucose assumes when it is stored
glycolysis
series of metabolic reactions that breaks
down glucose into pyruvate and produces ATP
hexokinase
cellular enzyme, found in most tissues,
that converts glucose into glucose-6-phosphate
upon uptake into the cell
hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA)
molecule
created in the first step of the creation of ketone
bodies from acetyl CoA
inactive proenzymes
forms in which proteases are
stored and released to prevent the inappropriate
digestion of the native proteins of the stomach,
pancreas, and small intestine
insulin
hormone secreted by the pancreas that
stimulates the uptake of glucose into the cells
ketone bodies
alternative source of energy when
glucose is limited, created when too much acetyl
CoA is created during fatty acid oxidation
Krebs cycle
also called the citric acid cycle or the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, converts pyruvate into CO2
and high-energy FADH2, NADH, and ATP molecules
lipogenesis
synthesis of lipids that occurs in the liver
or adipose tissues
lipolysis
breakdown of triglycerides into glycerol and
fatty acids
metabolic rate
amount of energy consumed minus
24 • Key Terms
1101
the amount of energy expended by the body
metabolism
sum of all catabolic and anabolic
reactions that take place in the body
minerals
inorganic compounds required by the body
to ensure proper function of the body
monoglyceride molecules
lipid consisting of a single
fatty acid chain attached to a glycerol backbone
monosaccharide
smallest, monomeric sugar
molecule
NADH
high-energy molecule needed for glycolysis
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
coenzyme
used to produce NADH
oxidation
loss of an electron
oxidation-reduction reaction
(also, redox reaction)
pair of reactions in which an electron is passed from
one molecule to another, oxidizing one and reducing
the other
oxidative phosphorylation
process that converts
high-energy NADH and FADH2 into ATP
pancreatic lipases
enzymes released from the
pancreas that digest lipids in the diet
pepsin
enzyme that begins to break down proteins in
the stomach
polysaccharides
complex carbohydrates made up of
many monosaccharides
postabsorptive state
also called the fasting state;
the metabolic state occurring after digestion when
food is no longer the body’s source of energy and it
must rely on stored glycogen
proteolysis
process of breaking proteins into smaller
peptides
pyruvate
three-carbon end product of glycolysis and
starting material that is converted into acetyl CoA
that enters the Krebs cycle
radiation
transfer of heat via infrared waves
reduction
gaining of an electron
salivary amylase
digestive enzyme that is found in
the saliva and begins the digestion of carbohydrates
in the mouth
secretin
hormone released in the small intestine to
aid in digestion
sodium bicarbonate
anion released into the small
intestine to neutralize the pH of the food from the
stomach
terminal electron acceptor
oxygen, the recipient of
the free hydrogen at the end of the electron
transport chain
thermoneutral
external temperature at which the
body does not expend any energy for
thermoregulation, about 84 °F
thermoregulation
process of regulating the
temperature of the body
transamination
transfer of an amine group from one
molecule to another as a way to turn nitrogen waste
into ammonia so that it can enter the urea cycle
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA)
also called the Krebs
cycle or the citric acid cycle; converts pyruvate into
CO2 and high-energy FADH2, NADH, and ATP
molecules
triglycerides
lipids, or fats, consisting of three fatty
acid chains attached to a glycerol backbone
trypsin
pancreatic enzyme that activates
chymotrypsin and digests protein
trypsinogen
proenzyme form of trypsin
urea cycle
process that converts potentially toxic
nitrogen waste into urea that can be eliminated
through the kidneys
vitamins
organic compounds required by the body to
perform biochemical reactions like metabolism and
bone, cell, and tissue growth
Chapter Review
24.1 Overview of Metabolic Reactions
Metabolism is the sum of all catabolic (break down)
and anabolic (synthesis) reactions in the body. The
metabolic rate measures the amount of energy used to
maintain life. An organism must ingest a sufficient
amount of food to maintain its metabolic rate if the
organism is to stay alive for very long.
Catabolic reactions break down larger molecules, such
as carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins from ingested
food, into their constituent smaller parts. They also
include the breakdown of ATP, which releases the
energy needed for metabolic processes in all cells
throughout the body.
Anabolic reactions, or biosynthetic reactions,
synthesize larger molecules from smaller constituent
parts, using ATP as the energy source for these
reactions. Anabolic reactions build bone, muscle mass,
and new proteins, fats, and nucleic acids. Oxidation-
reduction reactions transfer electrons across
molecules by oxidizing one molecule and reducing
another, and collecting the released energy to convert
Pi and ADP into ATP. Errors in metabolism alter the
processing of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acids, and can result in a number of disease
states.
24.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
Metabolic enzymes catalyze catabolic reactions that
break down carbohydrates contained in food. The
energy released is used to power the cells and systems
that make up your body. Excess or unutilized energy is
1102
24 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
stored as fat or glycogen for later use. Carbohydrate
metabolism begins in the mouth, where the enzyme
salivary amylase begins to break down complex sugars
into monosaccharides. These can then be transported
across the intestinal membrane into the bloodstream
and then to body tissues. In the cells, glucose, a six-
carbon sugar, is processed through a sequence of
reactions into smaller sugars, and the energy stored
inside the molecule is released. The first step of
carbohydrate catabolism is glycolysis, which produces
pyruvate, NADH, and ATP. Under anaerobic conditions,
the pyruvate can be converted into lactate to keep
glycolysis working. Under aerobic conditions, pyruvate
enters the Krebs cycle, also called the citric acid cycle
or tricarboxylic acid cycle. In addition to ATP, the Krebs
cycle produces high-energy FADH2 and NADH
molecules, which provide electrons to the oxidative
phosphorylation process that generates more high-
energy ATP molecules. For each molecule of glucose
that is processed in glycolysis, a net of 36 ATPs can be
created by aerobic respiration.
Under anaerobic conditions, ATP production is limited
to those generated by glycolysis. While a total of four
ATPs are produced by glycolysis, two are needed to
begin glycolysis, so there is a net yield of two ATP
molecules.
In conditions of low glucose, such as fasting,
starvation, or low carbohydrate diets, glucose can be
synthesized from lactate, pyruvate, glycerol, alanine, or
glutamate. This process, called gluconeogenesis, is
almost the reverse of glycolysis and serves to create
glucose molecules for glucose-dependent organs, such
as the brain, when glucose levels fall below normal.
24.3 Lipid Metabolism
Lipids are available to the body from three sources.
They can be ingested in the diet, stored in the adipose
tissue of the body, or synthesized in the liver. Fats
ingested in the diet are digested in the small intestine.
The triglycerides are broken down into monoglycerides
and free fatty acids, then imported across the intestinal
mucosa. Once across, the triglycerides are
resynthesized and transported to the liver or adipose
tissue. Fatty acids are oxidized through fatty acid or β-
oxidation into two-carbon acetyl CoA molecules, which
can then enter the Krebs cycle to generate ATP. If
excess acetyl CoA is created and overloads the
capacity of the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA can be used
to synthesize ketone bodies. When glucose is limited,
ketone bodies can be oxidized and used for fuel.
Excess acetyl CoA generated from excess glucose or
carbohydrate ingestion can be used for fatty acid
synthesis or lipogenesis. Acetyl CoA is used to create
lipids, triglycerides, steroid hormones, cholesterol, and
bile salts. Lipolysis is the breakdown of triglycerides
into glycerol and fatty acids, making them easier for the
body to process.
24.4 Protein Metabolism
Digestion of proteins begins in the stomach, where HCl
and pepsin begin the process of breaking down
proteins into their constituent amino acids. As the
chyme enters the small intestine, it mixes with
bicarbonate and digestive enzymes. The bicarbonate
neutralizes the acidic HCl, and the digestive enzymes
break down the proteins into smaller peptides and
amino acids. Digestive hormones secretin and CCK are
released from the small intestine to aid in digestive
processes, and digestive proenzymes are released
from the pancreas (trypsinogen and
chymotrypsinogen). Enterokinase, an enzyme located
in the wall of the small intestine, activates trypsin,
which in turn activates chymotrypsin. These enzymes
liberate the individual amino acids that are then
transported via sodium-amino acid transporters across
the intestinal wall into the cell. The amino acids are
then transported into the bloodstream for dispersal to
the liver and cells throughout the body to be used to
create new proteins. When in excess, the amino acids
are processed and stored as glucose or ketones. The
nitrogen waste that is liberated in this process is
converted to urea in the urea acid cycle and eliminated
in the urine. In times of starvation, amino acids can be
used as an energy source and processed through the
Krebs cycle.
24.5 Metabolic States of the Body
There are three main metabolic states of the body:
absorptive (fed), postabsorptive (fasting), and
starvation. During any given day, your metabolism
switches between absorptive and postabsorptive
states. Starvation states happen very rarely in generally
well-nourished individuals. When the body is fed,
glucose, fats, and proteins are absorbed across the
intestinal membrane and enter the bloodstream and
lymphatic system to be used immediately for fuel. Any
excess is stored for later fasting stages. As blood
glucose levels rise, the pancreas releases insulin to
stimulate the uptake of glucose by hepatocytes in the
liver, muscle cells/fibers, and adipocytes (fat cells), and
to promote its conversion to glycogen. As the
postabsorptive state begins, glucose levels drop, and
there is a corresponding drop in insulin levels. Falling
glucose levels trigger the pancreas to release glucagon
to turn off glycogen synthesis in the liver and stimulate
24 • Chapter Review
1103
its breakdown into glucose. The glucose is released
into the bloodstream to serve as a fuel source for cells
throughout the body. If glycogen stores are depleted
during fasting, alternative sources, including fatty acids
and proteins, can be metabolized and used as fuel.
When the body once again enters the absorptive state
after fasting, fats and proteins are digested and used to
replenish fat and protein stores, whereas glucose is
processed and used first to replenish the glycogen
stores in the peripheral tissues, then in the liver. If the
fast is not broken and starvation begins to set in, during
the initial days, glucose produced from
gluconeogenesis is still used by the brain and organs.
After a few days, however, ketone bodies are created
from fats and serve as the preferential fuel source for
the heart and other organs, so that the brain can still
use glucose. Once these stores are depleted, proteins
will be catabolized first from the organs with fast
turnover, such as the intestinal lining. Muscle will be
spared to prevent the wasting of muscle tissue;
however, these proteins will be used if alternative
stores are not available.
24.6 Energy and Heat Balance
Some of the energy from the food that is ingested is
used to maintain the core temperature of the body.
Most of the energy derived from the food is released as
heat. The core temperature is kept around 36.5–37.5
°C (97.7–99.5 °F). This is tightly regulated by the
hypothalamus in the brain, which senses changes in
the core temperature and operates like a thermostat to
increase sweating or shivering, or inducing other
mechanisms to return the temperature to its normal
range. The body can also gain or lose heat through
mechanisms of heat exchange. Conduction transfers
heat from one object to another through physical
contact. Convection transfers heat to air or water.
Radiation transfers heat via infrared radiation.
Evaporation transfers heat as water changes state from
a liquid to a gas.
24.7 Nutrition and Diet
Nutrition and diet affect your metabolism. More energy
is required to break down fats and proteins than
carbohydrates; however, all excess calories that are
ingested will be stored as fat in the body. On average, a
person requires 1500 to 2000 calories for normal daily
activity, although routine exercise will increase that
amount. If you ingest more than that, the remainder is
stored for later use. Conversely, if you ingest less than
that, the energy stores in your body will be depleted.
Both the quantity and quality of the food you eat affect
your metabolism and can affect your overall health.
Eating too much or too little can result in serious
medical conditions, including cardiovascular disease,
cancer, and diabetes.
Vitamins and minerals are essential parts of the diet.
They are needed for the proper function of metabolic
pathways in the body. Vitamins are not stored in the
body, so they must be obtained from the diet or
synthesized from precursors available in the diet.
Minerals are also obtained from the diet, but they are
also stored, primarily in skeletal tissues.
Review Questions
1. A monosaccharide is formed from a polysaccharide
in what kind of reaction?
a.
oxidation–reduction reaction
b.
anabolic reaction
c.
catabolic reaction
d.
biosynthetic reaction
2. If anabolic reactions exceed catabolic reactions,
the result will be ________.
a.
weight loss
b.
weight gain
c.
metabolic rate change
d.
development of disease
3. When NAD becomes NADH, the coenzyme has been
________.
a.
reduced
b.
oxidized
c.
metabolized
d.
hydrolyzed
4. Anabolic reactions use energy by ________.
a.
turning ADP into ATP
b.
removing a phosphate group from ATP
c.
producing heat
d.
breaking down molecules into smaller parts
5. Glycolysis results in the production of two
________ molecules from a single molecule of
glucose. In the absence of ________, the end
product of glycolysis is ________.
a.
acetyl CoA, pyruvate, lactate
b.
ATP, carbon, pyruvate
c.
pyruvate, oxygen, lactate
d.
pyruvate, carbon, acetyl CoA
1104
24 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
6. The Krebs cycle converts ________ through a cycle
of reactions. In the process, ATP, ________, and
________ are produced.
a.
acetyl CoA; FAD, NAD
b.
acetyl CoA; FADH2; NADH
c.
pyruvate; NAD; FADH2
d.
pyruvate; oxygen; oxaloacetate
7. Which pathway produces the most ATP molecules?
a.
lactic acid fermentation
b.
the Krebs cycle
c.
the electron transport chain
d.
glycolysis
8. Aerobic cellular respiration results in the
production of these two products.
a.
NADH and FADH2
b.
ATP and pyruvate
c.
ATP and glucose
d.
ATP and H2O
9. When NAD+ becomes NADH, the coenzyme has
been ________.
a.
reduced
b.
oxidized
c.
metabolized
d.
hydrolyzed
10. Lipids in the diet can be ________.
a.
broken down into energy for the body
b.
stored as triglycerides for later use
c.
converted into acetyl CoA
d.
all of the above
11. The gallbladder provides ________ that aid(s) in
transport of lipids across the intestinal membrane.
a.
lipases
b.
cholesterol
c.
proteins
d.
bile salts
12. Triglycerides are transported by chylomicrons
because ________.
a.
they cannot move easily in the blood stream
because they are fat based, while the blood is
water based
b.
they are too small to move by themselves
c.
the chylomicrons contain enzymes they need
for anabolism
d.
they cannot fit across the intestinal
membrane
13. Which molecule produces the most ATP?
a.
carbohydrates
b.
FADH2
c.
triglycerides
d.
NADH
14. Which molecules can enter the Krebs cycle?
a.
chylomicrons
b.
acetyl CoA
c.
monoglycerides
d.
ketone bodies
15. Acetyl CoA can be converted to all of the following
except ________.
a.
ketone bodies
b.
fatty acids
c.
polysaccharides
d.
triglycerides
16. Digestion of proteins begins in the ________
where ________ and ________ mix with food to
break down protein into ________.
a.
stomach; amylase; HCl; amino acids
b.
mouth; pepsin; HCl; fatty acids
c.
stomach; lipase; HCl; amino acids
d.
stomach; pepsin; HCl; amino acids
17. Amino acids are needed to ________.
a.
build new proteins
b.
serve as fat stores
c.
supply energy for the cell
d.
create red blood cells
18. If an amino acid is not used to create new
proteins, it can be ________.
a.
converted to acetyl CoA
b.
converted to glucose or ketones
c.
converted to nitrogen
d.
stored to be used later
19. During the absorptive state, glucose levels are
________, insulin levels are ________, and
glucagon levels ________.
a.
high; low; stay the same
b.
low; low; stay the same
c.
high; high; are high
d.
high; high; are low
20. Starvation sets in after 3 to 4 days without food.
Which hormones change in response to low
glucose levels?
a.
glucagon and insulin
b.
ketones and glucagon
c.
insulin, glucose, and glucagon
d.
insulin and ketones
24 • Review Questions
1105
21. The postabsorptive state relies on stores of
________ in the ________.
a.
insulin; pancreas
b.
glucagon; pancreas
c.
glycogen; liver
d.
glucose; liver
22. The body’s temperature is controlled by the
________. This temperature is always kept
between ________.
a.
pituitary; 36.5–37.5 °C
b.
hypothalamus; 97.7–99.5 °F
c.
hypothalamus; 36.5–37.5 °F
d.
pituitary; 97.7–99.5 °F
23. Fever increases the body temperature and can
induce chills to help cool the temperature back
down. What other mechanisms are in place to
regulate the body temperature?
a.
shivering
b.
sweating
c.
erection of the hairs on the arms and legs
d.
all of the above
24. The heat you feel on your chair when you stand up
was transferred from your skin via ________.
a.
conduction
b.
convection
c.
radiation
d.
evaporation
25. A crowded room warms up through the
mechanism of ________.
a.
conduction
b.
convection
c.
radiation
d.
evaporation
26. A deficiency in vitamin A can result in ________.
a.
improper bone development
b.
scurvy
c.
improper eye development or sight
d.
all of the above
27. Rickets results in improper bone development in
children that arises from the malabsorption of
calcium and a deficiency in ________.
a.
vitamin D
b.
vitamin C
c.
vitamin B12
d.
niacin
28. Consuming which type of food will help the most
with weight loss?
a.
fats
b.
vegetables
c.
lean meats
d.
fruits
29. Which of the following is stored in the body?
a.
thiamine
b.
phosphorous
c.
folic acid
d.
vitamin C
Critical Thinking Questions
30. Describe how metabolism can be altered.
31. Describe how Addison’s disease can be treated.
32. Explain how glucose is metabolized to yield ATP.
33. Insulin is released when food is ingested and
stimulates the uptake of glucose into the cell.
Discuss the mechanism cells employ to create a
concentration gradient to ensure continual uptake
of glucose from the bloodstream.
34. Discuss how carbohydrates can be stored as fat.
35. If a person with diabetes that has breath smells
like alcohol, what could this mean?
36. Amino acids are not stored in the body. Describe
how excess amino acids are processed in the cell.
37. Release of trypsin and chymotrypsin in their active
form can result in the digestion of the pancreas or
small intestine itself. What mechanism does the
body employ to prevent its self-destruction?
38. In type II diabetes, insulin is produced but is
nonfunctional. These patients are described as
“starving in a sea of plenty,” because their blood
glucose levels are high, but none of the glucose is
transported into the cells. Describe how this leads
to malnutrition.
39. Ketone bodies are used as an alternative source of
fuel during starvation. Describe how ketones are
synthesized.
40. How does vasoconstriction help increase the core
temperature of the body?
41. How can the ingestion of food increase the body
temperature?
42. Weight loss and weight gain are complex
processes. What are some of the main factors that
influence weight gain in people?
1106
24 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
43. Some low-fat or non-fat foods contain a large
amount of sugar to replace the fat content of the
food. Discuss how this leads to increased fat in the
body (and weight gain) even though the item is
non-fat.
24 • Critical Thinking Questions
1107
1108
24 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 25
The Urinary System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the composition of urine
•
Label structures of the urinary system
•
Characterize the roles of each of the parts of the urinary system
•
Illustrate the macroscopic and microscopic structures of the kidney
•
Trace the flow of blood through the kidney
•
Outline how blood is filtered in the kidney nephron
•
Provide symptoms of kidney failure
•
List some of the solutes filtered, secreted, and reabsorbed in different parts of the nephron
•
Describe the role of a portal system in the kidney
•
Explain how urine osmolarity is hormonally regulated
•
Describe the regulation of major ions by the kidney
•
Summarize the role of the kidneys in maintaining acid–base balance
The urinary system has roles you may be well aware of: cleansing the blood and ridding the body
of wastes probably come to mind. However, there are additional, equally important functions played by the system.
Take for example, regulation of pH, a function shared with the lungs and the buffers in the blood. Additionally, the
regulation of blood pressure is a role shared with the heart and blood vessels. What about regulating the
concentration of solutes in the blood? Did you know that the kidney is important in determining the concentration of
red blood cells? Eighty-five percent of the erythropoietin (EPO) produced to stimulate red blood cell production is
produced in the kidneys. The kidneys also perform the final synthesis step of vitamin D production, converting
calcidiol to calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D.
If the kidneys fail, these functions are compromised or lost altogether, with devastating effects on homeostasis. The
affected individual might experience weakness, lethargy, shortness of breath, anemia, widespread edema
(swelling), metabolic acidosis, rising potassium levels, heart arrhythmias, and more. Each of these functions is vital
to your well-being and survival. The urinary system, controlled by the nervous system, also stores urine until a
Figure 25.1
Sewage Treatment Plant (credit: “thekirbster”/flickr.com)
convenient time for disposal and then provides the anatomical structures to transport this waste liquid to the
outside of the body. Failure of nervous control or the anatomical structures leading to a loss of control of urination
results in a condition called incontinence.
This chapter will help you to understand the anatomy of the urinary system and how it enables the physiologic
functions critical to homeostasis. It is best to think of the kidney as a regulator of plasma makeup rather than simply
a urine producer. As you read each section, ask yourself this question: “What happens if this does not work?” This
question will help you to understand how the urinary system maintains homeostasis and affects all the other
systems of the body and the quality of one’s life.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/urineintro) from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute for an introduction to
the urinary system.
25.1 Physical Characteristics of Urine
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast blood plasma, glomerular filtrate, and urine characteristics
•
Describe the characteristics of a normal urine sample, including normal range of pH, osmolarity, and volume
The urinary system’s ability to filter the blood resides in about 2 to 3 million tufts of specialized capillaries—the
glomeruli—distributed more or less equally between the two kidneys. Because the glomeruli filter the blood based
mostly on particle size, large elements like blood cells, platelets, antibodies, and albumen are excluded. The
glomerulus is the first part of the nephron, which then continues as a highly specialized tubular structure
responsible for creating the final urine composition. All other solutes, such as ions, amino acids, vitamins, and
wastes, are filtered to create a filtrate composition very similar to plasma. The glomeruli create about 200 liters
(189 quarts) of this filtrate every day, yet you excrete less than two liters of waste you call urine.
Characteristics of the urine change, depending on influences such as water intake, exercise, environmental
temperature, nutrient intake, and other factors (Table 25.1). Some of the characteristics such as color and odor are
rough descriptors of your state of hydration. For example, if you exercise or work outside, and sweat a great deal,
your urine will turn darker and produce a slight odor, even if you drink plenty of water. Athletes are often advised to
consume water until their urine is clear. This is good advice; however, it takes time for the kidneys to process body
fluids and store it in the bladder. Another way of looking at this is that the quality of the urine produced is an average
over the time it takes to make that urine. Producing clear urine may take only a few minutes if you are drinking a lot
of water or several hours if you are working outside and not drinking much.
Normal Urine Characteristics
Characteristic
Normal values
Color
Pale yellow to deep amber
Odor
Odorless
Volume
750–2000 mL/24 hour
pH
4.5–8.0
Specific gravity
1.003–1.032
TABLE 25.1
1110
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Characteristic
Normal values
Osmolarity
40–1350 mOsmol/kg
Urobilinogen
0.2–1.0 mg/100 mL
White blood cells
0–2 HPF (per high-power field of microscope)
Leukocyte esterase
None
Protein
None or trace
Bilirubin
<0.3 mg/100 mL
Ketones
None
Nitrites
None
Blood
None
Glucose
None
TABLE 25.1
Urinalysis (urine analysis) often provides clues to renal disease. Normally, only traces of protein are found in urine,
and when higher amounts are found, damage to the glomeruli is the likely basis. Unusually large quantities of urine
may point to diseases like diabetes mellitus or hypothalamic tumors that cause diabetes insipidus. The color of
urine is determined mostly by the breakdown products of red blood cell destruction (Figure 25.2). The “heme” of
hemoglobin is converted by the liver into water-soluble forms that can be excreted into the bile and indirectly into
the urine. This yellow pigment is urochrome. Urine color may also be affected by certain foods like beets, berries,
and fava beans. A kidney stone or a cancer of the urinary system may produce sufficient bleeding to manifest as pink
or even bright red urine. Diseases of the liver or obstructions of bile drainage from the liver impart a dark “tea” or
“cola” hue to the urine. Dehydration produces darker, concentrated urine that may also possess the slight odor of
ammonia. Most of the ammonia produced from protein breakdown is converted into urea by the liver, so ammonia is
rarely detected in fresh urine. The strong ammonia odor you may detect in bathrooms or alleys is due to the
breakdown of urea into ammonia by bacteria in the environment. About one in five people detect a distinctive odor
in their urine after consuming asparagus; other foods such as onions, garlic, and fish can impart their own aromas!
These food-caused odors are harmless.
25.1 • Physical Characteristics of Urine
1111
FIGURE 25.2
Urine Color
Urine volume varies considerably. The normal range is one to two liters per day (Table 25.2). The kidneys must
produce a minimum urine volume of about 500 mL/day to rid the body of wastes. Output below this level may be
caused by severe dehydration or renal disease and is termed oliguria. The virtual absence of urine production is
termed anuria. Excessive urine production is polyuria, which may be due to diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus.
In diabetes mellitus, blood glucose levels exceed the number of available sodium-glucose transporters in the
kidney, and glucose appears in the urine. The osmotic nature of glucose attracts water, leading to its loss in the
urine. In the case of diabetes insipidus, insufficient pituitary antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release or insufficient
numbers of ADH receptors in the collecting ducts means that too few water channels are inserted into the cell
membranes that line the collecting ducts of the kidney. Insufficient numbers of water channels (aquaporins) reduce
water absorption, resulting in high volumes of very dilute urine.
Urine Volumes
Volume
condition
Volume
Causes
Normal
1–2 L/
day
Polyuria
>2.5 L/
day
Diabetes mellitus; diabetes insipidus; excess caffeine or alcohol; kidney disease;
certain drugs, such as diuretics; sickle cell anemia; excessive water intake
TABLE 25.2
1112
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Volume
condition
Volume
Causes
Oliguria
300–500
mL/day
Dehydration; blood loss; diarrhea; cardiogenic shock; kidney disease; enlarged prostate
Anuria
<50 mL/
day
Kidney failure; obstruction, such as kidney stone or tumor; enlarged prostate
TABLE 25.2
The pH (hydrogen ion concentration) of the urine can vary more than 1000-fold, from a normal low of 4.5 to a
maximum of 8.0. Diet can influence pH; meats lower the pH, whereas citrus fruits, vegetables, and dairy products
raise the pH. Chronically high or low pH can lead to disorders, such as the development of kidney stones or
osteomalacia.
Specific gravity is a measure of the quantity of solutes per unit volume of a solution and is traditionally easier to
measure than osmolarity. Urine will always have a specific gravity greater than pure water (water = 1.0) due to the
presence of solutes. Laboratories can now measure urine osmolarity directly, which is a more accurate indicator of
urinary solutes than specific gravity. Remember that osmolarity is the number of osmoles or milliosmoles per liter
of fluid (mOsmol/L). Urine osmolarity ranges from a low of 50–100 mOsmol/L to as high as 1200 mOsmol/L H2O.
Cells are not normally found in the urine. The presence of leukocytes may indicate a urinary tract infection.
Leukocyte esterase is released by leukocytes; if detected in the urine, it can be taken as indirect evidence of a
urinary tract infection (UTI).
Protein does not normally leave the glomerular capillaries, so only trace amounts of protein should be found in the
urine, approximately 10 mg/100 mL in a random sample. If excessive protein is detected in the urine, it usually
means that the glomerulus is damaged and is allowing protein to “leak” into the filtrate.
Ketones are byproducts of fat metabolism. Finding ketones in the urine suggests that the body is using fat as an
energy source in preference to glucose. In diabetes mellitus when there is not enough insulin (type I diabetes
mellitus) or because of insulin resistance (type II diabetes mellitus), there is plenty of glucose, but without the
action of insulin, the cells cannot take it up, so it remains in the bloodstream. Instead, the cells are forced to use fat
as their energy source, and fat consumed at such a level produces excessive ketones as byproducts. These excess
ketones will appear in the urine. Ketones may also appear if there is a severe deficiency of proteins or carbohydrates
in the diet.
Nitrates (NO3–) occur normally in the urine. Gram-negative bacteria metabolize nitrate into nitrite (NO2–), and its
presence in the urine is indirect evidence of infection.
There should be no blood found in the urine. It may sometimes appear in urine samples as a result of menstrual
contamination, but this is not an abnormal condition. Now that you understand what the normal characteristics of
urine are, the next section will introduce you to how you store and dispose of this waste product and how you make
it.
25.2 Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra, as well as their location, structure, histology, and function
•
Compare and contrast male and female urethras
•
Describe the micturition reflex
•
Describe voluntary and involuntary neural control of micturition
Rather than start with urine formation, this section will start with urine excretion. Urine is a fluid of variable
composition that requires specialized structures to remove it from the body safely and efficiently. Blood is filtered,
25.2 • Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
1113
and the filtrate is transformed into urine at a relatively constant rate throughout the day. This processed liquid is
stored until a convenient time for excretion. All structures involved in the transport and storage of the urine are large
enough to be visible to the naked eye. This transport and storage system not only stores the waste, but it protects
the tissues from damage due to the wide range of pH and osmolarity of the urine, prevents infection by foreign
organisms, and for the male, provides reproductive functions.
Urethra
The urethra transports urine from the bladder to the outside of the body for disposal. The urethra is the only
urologic organ that shows any significant anatomic difference between males and females; all other urine transport
structures are identical (Figure 25.3).
FIGURE 25.3
Female and Male Urethras
The urethra transports urine from the bladder to the outside of the body. This image shows
(a) a female urethra and (b) a male urethra.
The urethra in both males and females begins inferior and central to the two ureteral openings forming the three
points of a triangular-shaped area at the base of the bladder called the trigone (Greek tri- = “triangle” and the root
of the word “trigonometry”). The urethra tracks posterior and inferior to the pubic symphysis (see Figure 25.3a). In
both males and females, the proximal urethra is lined by transitional epithelium, whereas the terminal portion is a
nonkeratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. In the male, pseudostratified columnar epithelium lines the urethra
between these two cell types. Voiding is regulated by an involuntary autonomic nervous system-controlled internal
urinary sphincter, consisting of smooth muscle and voluntary skeletal muscle that forms the external urinary
sphincter below it.
Female Urethra
The external urethral orifice is embedded in the anterior vaginal wall inferior to the clitoris, superior to the vaginal
opening (introitus), and medial to the labia minora. Its short length, about 4 cm, is less of a barrier to fecal bacteria
than the longer male urethra and the best explanation for the greater incidence of UTI in females. Voluntary control
of the external urethral sphincter is a function of the pudendal nerve. It arises in the sacral region of the spinal cord,
traveling via the S2–S4 nerves of the sacral plexus.
Male Urethra
The male urethra passes through the prostate gland immediately inferior to the bladder before passing below the
pubic symphysis (see Figure 25.3b). The length of the male urethra varies between people but averages 20 cm in
length. It is divided into four regions: the preprostatic urethra, the prostatic urethra, the membranous urethra, and
the spongy or penile urethra. The preprostatic urethra is very short and incorporated into the bladder wall. The
prostatic urethra passes through the prostate gland. During sexual intercourse, it receives sperm via the ejaculatory
ducts and secretions from the seminal vesicles. Paired Cowper’s glands (bulbourethral glands) produce and secrete
mucus into the urethra to buffer urethral pH during sexual stimulation. The mucus neutralizes the usually acidic
environment and lubricates the urethra, decreasing the resistance to ejaculation. The membranous urethra passes
through the deep muscles of the perineum, where it is invested by the overlying urethral sphincters. The spongy
urethra exits at the tip (external urethral orifice) of the penis after passing through the corpus spongiosum. Mucous
glands are found along much of the length of the urethra and protect the urethra from extremes of urine pH.
Innervation is the same in both males and females.
1114
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Bladder
The urinary bladder collects urine from both ureters (Figure 25.4). The bladder lies anterior to the uterus in females,
posterior to the pubic bone and anterior to the rectum. During late pregnancy, its capacity is reduced due to
compression by the enlarging uterus, resulting in increased frequency of urination. In males, the anatomy is similar,
minus the uterus, and with the addition of the prostate inferior to the bladder. The bladder is a retroperitoneal
organ whose "dome" distends superiorly when the bladder is filling with urine.
FIGURE 25.4
Bladder
(a) Anterior cross section of the bladder. (b) The detrusor muscle of the bladder (source: monkey tissue) LM ×
448. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/bladderMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail.
The bladder is a highly distensible organ comprised of irregular crisscrossing bands of smooth muscle collectively
called the detrusor muscle. The interior surface is made of transitional cellular epithelium that is structurally suited
for the large volume fluctuations of the bladder. When empty, it resembles columnar epithelia, but when stretched,
it “transitions” (hence the name) to a squamous appearance (see Figure 25.4). Volumes in adults can range from
nearly zero to 500–600 mL.
The detrusor muscle contracts with significant force in the young. The bladder’s strength diminishes with age, but
voluntary contractions of abdominal skeletal muscles can increase intra-abdominal pressure to promote more
forceful bladder emptying. Such voluntary contraction is also used in forceful defecation and childbirth.
Micturition Reflex
Micturition is a less-often used, but proper term for urination or voiding. It results from an interplay of involuntary
and voluntary actions by the internal and external urethral sphincters. When bladder volume reaches about 150 mL,
an urge to void is sensed but is easily overridden. Voluntary control of urination relies on consciously preventing
relaxation of the external urethral sphincter to maintain urinary continence. As the bladder fills, subsequent urges
become harder to ignore. Ultimately, voluntary constraint fails with resulting incontinence, which will occur as
bladder volume approaches 300 to 400 mL.
Normal micturition is a result of stretch receptors in the bladder wall that transmit nerve impulses to the sacral
region of the spinal cord to generate a spinal reflex. The resulting parasympathetic neural outflow causes
contraction of the detrusor muscle and relaxation of the involuntary internal urethral sphincter. At the same time,
the spinal cord inhibits somatic motor neurons, resulting in the relaxation of the skeletal muscle of the external
25.2 • Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
1115
urethral sphincter. The micturition reflex is active in infants but with maturity, children learn to override the reflex by
asserting external sphincter control, thereby delaying voiding (potty training). This reflex may be preserved even in
the face of spinal cord injury that results in paraplegia or quadriplegia. However, relaxation of the external sphincter
may not be possible in all cases, and therefore, periodic catheterization may be necessary for bladder emptying.
Nerves involved in the control of urination include the hypogastric, pelvic, and pudendal (Figure 25.5). Voluntary
micturition requires an intact spinal cord and functional pudendal nerve arising from the sacral micturition center.
Since the external urinary sphincter is voluntary skeletal muscle, actions by cholinergic neurons maintain
contraction (and thereby continence) during filling of the bladder. At the same time, sympathetic nervous activity via
the hypogastric nerves suppresses contraction of the detrusor muscle. With further bladder stretch, afferent signals
traveling over sacral pelvic nerves activate parasympathetic neurons. This activates efferent neurons to release
acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junctions, producing detrusor contraction and bladder emptying.
FIGURE 25.5
Nerves Innervating the Urinary System
Ureters
The kidneys and ureters are completely retroperitoneal, and the bladder has a peritoneal covering only over the
dome. As urine is formed, it drains into the calyces of the kidney, which merge to form the funnel-shaped renal
pelvis in the hilum of each kidney. The renal pelvis narrows to become the ureter of each kidney. As urine passes
through the ureter, it does not passively drain into the bladder but rather is propelled by waves of peristalsis. As the
ureters enter the pelvis, they sweep laterally, hugging the pelvic walls. As they approach the bladder, they turn
medially and pierce the bladder wall obliquely. This is important because it creates a one-way valve (a physiological
sphincter rather than an anatomical sphincter) that allows urine into the bladder but prevents reflux of urine from
the bladder back into the ureter. Children born lacking this oblique course of the ureter through the bladder wall are
susceptible to “vesicoureteral reflux,” which dramatically increases their risk of serious UTI. Pregnancy also
increases the likelihood of reflux and UTI.
The ureters are approximately 30 cm long. The inner mucosa is lined with transitional epithelium (Figure 25.6) and
scattered goblet cells that secrete protective mucus. The muscular layer of the ureter consists of longitudinal and
circular smooth muscles that create the peristaltic contractions to move the urine into the bladder without the aid of
gravity. Finally, a loose adventitial layer composed of collagen and fat anchors the ureters between the parietal
peritoneum and the posterior abdominal wall.
1116
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 25.6
Ureter
Peristaltic contractions help to move urine through the lumen with contributions from fluid pressure and gravity.
LM × 128. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
25.3 Gross Anatomy of the Kidney
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the external structure of the kidney, including its location, support structures, and covering
•
Identify the major internal divisions and structures of the kidney
•
Identify the major blood vessels associated with the kidney and trace the path of blood through the kidney
•
Compare and contrast the cortical and juxtamedullary nephrons
•
Name structures found in the cortex and medulla
•
Describe the physiological characteristics of the cortex and medulla
The kidneys lie on either side of the spine in the retroperitoneal space between the parietal peritoneum and the
posterior abdominal wall, well protected by muscle, fat, and ribs. They are roughly the size of your fist, and the male
kidney is typically a bit larger than the female kidney. The kidneys are well vascularized, receiving about 25 percent
of the cardiac output at rest.
INTERACTIVE LINK
There have never been sufficient kidney donations to provide a kidney to each person needing one. Watch this video
(http://openstax.org/l/TED) to learn about the TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) Conference held in March
2011. In this video, Dr. Anthony Atala discusses a cutting-edge technique in which a new kidney is “printed.” The
successful utilization of this technology is still several years in the future, but imagine a time when you can print a
replacement organ or tissue on demand.
External Anatomy
The left kidney is located at about the T12 to L3 vertebrae, whereas the right is lower due to slight displacement by
the liver. Upper portions of the kidneys are somewhat protected by the eleventh and twelfth ribs (Figure 25.7). Each
kidney weighs about 125–175 g in males and 115–155 g in females. They are about 11–14 cm in length, 6 cm wide,
and 4 cm thick, and are directly covered by a fibrous capsule composed of dense, irregular connective tissue that
helps to hold their shape and protect them. This capsule is covered by a shock-absorbing layer of adipose tissue
25.3 • Gross Anatomy of the Kidney
1117
called the renal fat pad, which in turn is encompassed by a tough renal fascia. The fascia and, to a lesser extent, the
overlying peritoneum serve to firmly anchor the kidneys to the posterior abdominal wall in a retroperitoneal position.
FIGURE 25.7
Kidneys
The kidneys are slightly protected by the ribs and are surrounded by fat for protection (not shown).
On the superior aspect of each kidney is the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex directly influences renal function
through the production of the hormone aldosterone to stimulate sodium reabsorption.
Internal Anatomy
A frontal section through the kidney reveals an outer region called the renal cortex and an inner region called the
medulla (Figure 25.8). The renal columns are connective tissue extensions that radiate downward from the cortex
through the medulla to separate the most characteristic features of the medulla, the renal pyramids and renal
papillae. The papillae are bundles of collecting ducts that transport urine made by nephrons to the calyces of the
kidney for excretion. The renal columns also serve to divide the kidney into 6–8 lobes and provide a supportive
framework for vessels that enter and exit the cortex. The pyramids and renal columns taken together constitute the
kidney lobes.
FIGURE 25.8
Left Kidney
1118
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Renal Hilum
The renal hilum is the entry and exit site for structures servicing the kidneys: vessels, nerves, lymphatics, and
ureters. The medial-facing hila are tucked into the sweeping convex outline of the cortex. Emerging from the hilum is
the renal pelvis, which is formed from the major and minor calyxes in the kidney. The smooth muscle in the renal
pelvis funnels urine via peristalsis into the ureter. The renal arteries form directly from the descending aorta,
whereas the renal veins return cleansed blood directly to the inferior vena cava. The artery, vein, and renal pelvis are
arranged in an anterior-to-posterior order.
Nephrons and Vessels
The renal artery first divides into segmental arteries, followed by further branching to form interlobar arteries that
pass through the renal columns to reach the cortex (Figure 25.9). The interlobar arteries, in turn, branch into arcuate
arteries, cortical radiate arteries, and then into afferent arterioles. The afferent arterioles service about 1.3 million
nephrons in each kidney.
FIGURE 25.9
Blood Flow in the Kidney
Nephrons are the “functional units” of the kidney; they cleanse the blood and balance the constituents of the
circulation. The afferent arterioles form a tuft of high-pressure capillaries about 200 µm in diameter, the
glomerulus. The rest of the nephron consists of a continuous sophisticated tubule whose proximal end surrounds
the glomerulus in an intimate embrace—this is Bowman’s capsule. The glomerulus and Bowman’s capsule together
form the renal corpuscle. As mentioned earlier, these glomerular capillaries filter the blood based on particle size.
After passing through the renal corpuscle, the capillaries form a second arteriole, the efferent arteriole (Figure
25.10). These will next form a capillary network around the more distal portions of the nephron tubule, the
peritubular capillaries and vasa recta, before returning to the venous system. As the glomerular filtrate progresses
through the nephron, these capillary networks recover most of the solutes and water, and return them to the
circulation. Since a capillary bed (the glomerulus) drains into a vessel that in turn forms a second capillary bed, the
definition of a portal system is met. This is the only portal system in which an arteriole is found between the first and
second capillary beds. (Portal systems also link the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary, and the blood vessels of
the digestive viscera to the liver.)
25.3 • Gross Anatomy of the Kidney
1119
FIGURE 25.10
Blood Flow in the Nephron
The two capillary beds are clearly shown in this figure. The efferent arteriole is the
connecting vessel between the glomerulus and the peritubular capillaries and vasa recta.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this link (http://openstax.org/l/bloodflow5) to view an interactive tutorial of the flow of blood through the
kidney.
Cortex
In a dissected kidney, it is easy to identify the cortex; it appears lighter in color compared to the rest of the kidney.
All of the renal corpuscles as well as both the proximal convoluted tubules (PCTs) and distal convoluted tubules
are found here. Some nephrons have a short loop of Henle that does not dip beyond the cortex. These nephrons are
called cortical nephrons. About 15 percent of nephrons have long loops of Henle that extend deep into the medulla
and are called juxtamedullary nephrons.
1120
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
25.4 Microscopic Anatomy of the Kidney
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the histological differences between the renal cortex and medulla
•
Describe the structure of the filtration membrane
•
Identify the major structures and subdivisions of the renal corpuscles, renal tubules, and renal capillaries
•
Discuss the function of the peritubular capillaries and vasa recta
•
Identify the location of the juxtaglomerular apparatus and describe the cells that line it
•
Describe the histology of the proximal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubule, and collecting
ducts
The renal structures that conduct the essential work of the kidney cannot be seen by the naked eye. Only a light or
electron microscope can reveal these structures. Even then, serial sections and computer reconstruction are
necessary to give us a comprehensive view of the functional anatomy of the nephron and its associated blood
vessels.
Nephrons: The Functional Unit
Nephrons take a simple filtrate of the blood and modify it into urine. Many changes take place in the different parts
of the nephron before urine is created for disposal. The term forming urine will be used hereafter to describe the
filtrate as it is modified into true urine. The principle task of the nephron population is to balance the plasma to
homeostatic set points and excrete potential toxins in the urine. They do this by accomplishing three principle
functions—filtration, reabsorption, and secretion. They also have additional secondary functions that exert control in
three areas: blood pressure (via production of renin), red blood cell production (via the hormone EPO), and calcium
absorption (via conversion of calcidiol into calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D).
Renal Corpuscle
As discussed earlier, the renal corpuscle consists of a tuft of capillaries called the glomerulus that is largely
surrounded by Bowman’s (glomerular) capsule. The glomerulus is a high-pressure capillary bed between afferent
and efferent arterioles. Bowman’s capsule surrounds the glomerulus to form a lumen, and captures and directs this
filtrate to the PCT. The outermost part of Bowman’s capsule, the parietal layer, is a simple squamous epithelium. It
transitions onto the glomerular capillaries in an intimate embrace to form the visceral layer of the capsule. Here, the
cells are not squamous, but uniquely shaped cells (podocytes) extending finger-like arms (pedicels) to cover the
glomerular capillaries (Figure 25.11). These projections interdigitate to form filtration slits, leaving small gaps
between the digits to form a sieve. As blood passes through the glomerulus, 10 to 20 percent of the plasma filters
between these sieve-like fingers to be captured by Bowman’s capsule and funneled to the PCT. Where the fenestrae
(windows) in the glomerular capillaries match the spaces between the podocyte “fingers,” the only thing separating
the capillary lumen and the lumen of Bowman’s capsule is their shared basement membrane (Figure 25.12). These
three features comprise what is known as the filtration membrane. This membrane permits very rapid movement of
filtrate from capillary to capsule though pores that are only 70 nm in diameter.
25.4 • Microscopic Anatomy of the Kidney
1121
FIGURE 25.11
Podocytes
Podocytes interdigitate with structures called pedicels and filter substances in a way similar to fenestrations.
In (a), the large cell body can be seen at the top right corner, with branches extending from the cell body. The smallest finger-like
extensions are the pedicels. Pedicels on one podocyte always interdigitate with the pedicels of another podocyte. (b) This capillary has
three podocytes wrapped around it.
FIGURE 25.12
Fenestrated Capillary
Fenestrations allow many substances to diffuse from the blood based primarily on size.
The fenestrations prevent filtration of blood cells or large proteins, but allow most other constituents through.
These substances cross readily if they are less than 4 nm in size and most pass freely up to 8 nm in size. An
additional factor affecting the ability of substances to cross this barrier is their electric charge. The proteins
associated with these pores are negatively charged, so they tend to repel negatively charged substances and allow
positively charged substances to pass more readily. The basement membrane prevents filtration of medium-to-large
proteins such as globulins. There are also mesangial cells in the filtration membrane that can contract to help
regulate the rate of filtration of the glomerulus. Overall, filtration is regulated by fenestrations in capillary
endothelial cells, podocytes with filtration slits, membrane charge, and the basement membrane between capillary
cells. The result is the creation of a filtrate that does not contain cells or large proteins, and has a slight
predominance of positively charged substances.
Lying just outside Bowman’s capsule and the glomerulus is the juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA) (Figure 25.13). At
the juncture where the afferent and efferent arterioles enter and leave Bowman’s capsule, the initial part of the
distal convoluted tubule (DCT) comes into direct contact with the arterioles. The wall of the DCT at that point forms
a part of the JGA known as the macula densa. This cluster of cuboidal epithelial cells monitors the fluid
composition of fluid flowing through the DCT. In response to the concentration of Na+ in the fluid flowing past them,
these cells release paracrine signals. They also have a single, nonmotile cilium that responds to the rate of fluid
movement in the tubule. The paracrine signals released in response to changes in flow rate and Na+ concentration
are adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenosine.
1122
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 25.13
Juxtaglomerular Apparatus and Glomerulus
(a) The JGA allows specialized cells to monitor the composition of the
fluid in the DCT and adjust the glomerular filtration rate. (b) This micrograph shows the glomerulus and surrounding structures. LM × 1540.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
A second cell type in this apparatus is the juxtaglomerular cell. This is a modified, smooth muscle cell lining the
afferent arteriole that can contract or relax in response to ATP or adenosine released by the macula densa. Such
contraction and relaxation regulate blood flow to the glomerulus. If the osmolarity of the filtrate is too high
(hyperosmotic), the juxtaglomerular cells will contract, decreasing the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) so less
plasma is filtered, leading to less urine formation and greater retention of fluid. This will ultimately decrease blood
osmolarity toward the physiologic norm. If the osmolarity of the filtrate is too low, the juxtaglomerular cells will
relax, increasing the GFR and enhancing the loss of water to the urine, causing blood osmolarity to rise. In other
words, when blood osmolarity goes up, filtration and urine formation decrease and water is retained. When blood
osmolarity goes down, filtration and urine formation increase and water is lost by way of the urine. The net result of
these opposing actions is to keep the rate of filtration relatively constant. A second function of the macula densa
cells is to regulate renin release from the juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole (Figure 25.14). Active renin is
a protein comprised of 304 amino acids that cleaves several amino acids from angiotensinogen to produce
angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is not biologically active until converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) from the lungs. Angiotensin II is a systemic vasoconstrictor that helps to regulate blood pressure by
increasing it. Angiotensin II also stimulates the release of the steroid hormone aldosterone from the adrenal cortex.
Aldosterone stimulates Na+ reabsorption by the kidney, which also results in water retention and increased blood
pressure.
25.4 • Microscopic Anatomy of the Kidney
1123
FIGURE 25.14
Conversion of Angiotensin I to Angiotensin II
The enzyme renin converts the pro-enzyme angiotensin I; the lung-
derived enzyme ACE converts angiotensin I into active angiotensin II.
Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT)
Filtered fluid collected by Bowman’s capsule enters into the PCT. It is called convoluted due to its tortuous path.
Simple cuboidal cells form this tubule with prominent microvilli on the luminal surface, forming a brush border.
These microvilli create a large surface area to maximize the absorption and secretion of solutes (Na+, Cl–, glucose,
etc.), the most essential function of this portion of the nephron. These cells actively transport ions across their
membranes, so they possess a high concentration of mitochondria in order to produce sufficient ATP.
Loop of Henle
The descending and ascending portions of the loop of Henle (sometimes referred to as the nephron loop) are, of
course, just continuations of the same tubule. They run adjacent and parallel to each other after having made a
hairpin turn at the deepest point of their descent. The descending loop of Henle consists of an initial short, thick
portion and long, thin portion, whereas the ascending loop consists of an initial short, thin portion followed by a
long, thick portion. The descending thick portion consists of simple cuboidal epithelium similar to that of the PCT.
The descending and ascending thin portions consists of simple squamous epithelium. As you will see later, these are
important differences, since different portions of the loop have different permeabilities for solutes and water. The
ascending thick portion consists of simple cuboidal epithelium similar to the DCT.
Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT)
The DCT, like the PCT, is very tortuous and formed by simple cuboidal epithelium, but it is shorter than the PCT.
These cells are not as active as those in the PCT; thus, there are fewer microvilli on the apical surface. However,
these cells must also pump ions against their concentration gradient, so you will find of large numbers of
mitochondria, although fewer than in the PCT.
Collecting Ducts
The collecting ducts are continuous with the nephron but not technically part of it. In fact, each duct collects filtrate
from several nephrons for final modification. Collecting ducts merge as they descend deeper in the medulla to form
about 30 terminal ducts, which empty at a papilla. They are lined with simple squamous epithelium with receptors
for ADH. When stimulated by ADH, these cells will insert aquaporin channel proteins into their membranes, which
as their name suggests, allow water to pass from the duct lumen through the cells and into the interstitial spaces to
be recovered by the vasa recta. This process allows for the recovery of large amounts of water from the filtrate back
1124
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
into the blood. In the absence of ADH, these channels are not inserted, resulting in the excretion of water in the
form of dilute urine. Most, if not all, cells of the body contain aquaporin molecules, whose channels are so small that
only water can pass. At least 10 types of aquaporins are known in humans, and six of those are found in the kidney.
The function of all aquaporins is to allow the movement of water across the lipid-rich, hydrophobic cell membrane
(Figure 25.15).
FIGURE 25.15
Aquaporin Water Channel
Positive charges inside the channel prevent the leakage of electrolytes across the cell
membrane, while allowing water to move due to osmosis.
25.5 Physiology of Urine Formation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the hydrostatic and colloid osmotic forces that favor and oppose filtration
•
Describe glomerular filtration rate (GFR), state the average value of GFR, and explain how clearance rate can be
used to measure GFR
•
Predict specific factors that will increase or decrease GFR
•
State the percent of the filtrate that is normally reabsorbed and explain why the process of reabsorption is so
important
•
Calculate daily urine production
•
List common symptoms of kidney failure
Having reviewed the anatomy and microanatomy of the urinary system, now is the time to focus on the physiology.
You will discover that different parts of the nephron utilize specific processes to produce urine: filtration,
reabsorption, and secretion. You will learn how each of these processes works and where they occur along the
nephron and collecting ducts. The physiologic goal is to modify the composition of the plasma and, in doing so,
produce the waste product urine.
Failure of the renal anatomy and/or physiology can lead suddenly or gradually to renal failure. In this event, a
number of symptoms, signs, or laboratory findings point to the diagnosis (Table 25.3).
Symptoms of Kidney Failure
Weakness
Lethargy
Shortness of breath
Widespread edema
Anemia
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Heart arrhythmias
Uremia (high urea level in the blood)
Loss of appetite
TABLE 25.3
25.5 • Physiology of Urine Formation
1125
Fatigue
Excessive urination
Oliguria (too little urine output)
TABLE 25.3
Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
The volume of filtrate formed by both kidneys per minute is termed the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The heart
pumps about 5 L blood per min under resting conditions. Approximately 20 percent or one liter enters the kidneys to
be filtered. On average, this liter results in the production of about 125 mL/min filtrate produced in males (range of
90 to 140 mL/min) and 105 mL/min filtrate produced in females (range of 80 to 125 mL/min). This amount equates
to a volume of about 180 L/day in males and 150 L/day in females. Ninety-nine percent of this filtrate is returned to
the circulation by reabsorption so that only about 1–2 liters of urine are produced per day (Table 25.4).
Calculating Urine Formation per Day
Flow per
minute
(mL)
Calculation
Renal
blood flow
1050
Cardiac output is about 5000 mL/minute, of which 21 percent flows through the
kidney.
5000*0.21 = 1050 mL blood/min
Renal
plasma
flow
578
Renal plasma flow equals the blood flow per minute times the hematocrit. If a
person has a hematocrit of 45, then the renal plasma flow is 55 percent.
1050*0.55 = 578 mL plasma/min
Glomerular
filtration
rate
110
The GFR is the amount of plasma entering Bowman’s capsule per minute. It is the
renal plasma flow times the fraction that enters the renal capsule (19 percent).
578*0.19 = 110 mL filtrate/min
Urine
1296 ml/
day
The filtrate not recovered by the kidney is the urine that will be eliminated. It is the
GFR times the fraction of the filtrate that is not reabsorbed (0.8 percent).
110*.008 = 0.9 mL urine /min
Multiply urine/min times 60 minutes times 24 hours to get daily urine production.
0.9*60*24 = 1296 mL/day urine
TABLE 25.4
GFR is influenced by the hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure on either side of the capillary membrane
of the glomerulus. Recall that filtration occurs as pressure forces fluid and solutes through a semipermeable barrier
with the solute movement constrained by particle size. Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure produced by a fluid
against a surface. If you have a fluid on both sides of a barrier, both fluids exert a pressure in opposing directions.
Net fluid movement will be in the direction of the lower pressure. Osmosis is the movement of solvent (water)
across a membrane that is impermeable to a solute in the solution. This creates a pressure, osmotic pressure, which
will exist until the solute concentration is the same on both sides of a semipermeable membrane. As long as the
concentration differs, water will move. Glomerular filtration occurs when glomerular hydrostatic pressure exceeds
1126
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
the luminal hydrostatic pressure of Bowman’s capsule. There is also an opposing force, the osmotic pressure, which
is typically higher in the glomerular capillary.
To understand why this is so, look more closely at the microenvironment on either side of the filtration membrane.
You will find osmotic pressure exerted by the solutes inside the lumen of the capillary as well as inside of Bowman’s
capsule. Since the filtration membrane limits the size of particles crossing the membrane, the osmotic pressure
inside the glomerular capillary is higher than the osmotic pressure in Bowman’s capsule. Recall that cells and the
medium-to-large proteins cannot pass between the podocyte processes or through the fenestrations of the capillary
endothelial cells. This means that red and white blood cells, platelets, albumins, and other proteins too large to pass
through the filter remain in the capillary, creating an average colloid osmotic pressure of 30 mm Hg within the
capillary. The absence of proteins in Bowman’s space (the lumen within Bowman’s capsule) results in an osmotic
pressure near zero. Thus, the only pressure moving fluid across the capillary wall into the lumen of Bowman’s space
is hydrostatic pressure. Hydrostatic (fluid) pressure is sufficient to push water through the membrane despite the
osmotic pressure working against it. The sum of all of the influences, both osmotic and hydrostatic, results in a net
filtration pressure (NFP) of about 10 mm Hg (Figure 25.16).
FIGURE 25.16
Net Filtration Pressure
The NFP is the sum of osmotic and hydrostatic pressures.
A proper concentration of solutes in the blood is important in maintaining osmotic pressure both in the glomerulus
and systemically. There are disorders in which too much protein passes through the filtration slits into the kidney
filtrate. This excess protein in the filtrate leads to a deficiency of circulating plasma proteins. In turn, the presence of
protein in the urine increases its osmolarity; this holds more water in the filtrate and results in an increase in urine
volume. Because there is less circulating protein, principally albumin, the osmotic pressure of the blood falls. Less
osmotic pressure pulling water into the capillaries tips the balance towards hydrostatic pressure, which tends to
push it out of the capillaries. The net effect is that water is lost from the circulation to interstitial tissues and cells.
This “plumps up” the tissues and cells, a condition termed systemic edema.
Net Filtration Pressure (NFP)
NFP determines filtration rates through the kidney. It is determined as follows:
NFP = Glomerular blood hydrostatic pressure (GBHP) – [capsular hydrostatic pressure (CHP) + blood colloid osmotic
pressure (BCOP)] = 10 mm Hg
That is:
25.5 • Physiology of Urine Formation
1127
NFP = GBHP – [CHP + BCOP] = 10 mm Hg
Or:
NFP = 55 – [15 + 30] = 10 mm Hg
As you can see, there is a low net pressure across the filtration membrane. Intuitively, you should realize that minor
changes in osmolarity of the blood or changes in capillary blood pressure result in major changes in the amount of
filtrate formed at any given point in time. The kidney is able to cope with a wide range of blood pressures. In large
part, this is due to the autoregulatory nature of smooth muscle. When you stretch it, it contracts. Thus, when blood
pressure goes up, smooth muscle in the afferent capillaries contracts to limit any increase in blood flow and
filtration rate. When blood pressure drops, the same capillaries relax to maintain blood flow and filtration rate. The
net result is a relatively steady flow of blood into the glomerulus and a relatively steady filtration rate in spite of
significant systemic blood pressure changes. Mean arterial blood pressure is calculated by adding 1/3 of the
difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures to the diastolic pressure. Therefore, if the blood pressure is
110/80, the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure is 30. One third of this is 10, and when you add this
to the diastolic pressure of 80, you arrive at a calculated mean arterial pressure of 90 mm Hg. Therefore, if you use
mean arterial pressure for the GBHP in the formula for calculating NFP, you can determine that as long as mean
arterial pressure is above approximately 60 mm Hg, the pressure will be adequate to maintain glomerular filtration.
Blood pressures below this level will impair renal function and cause systemic disorders that are severe enough to
threaten survival. This condition is called shock.
Determination of the GFR is one of the tools used to assess the kidney’s excretory function. This is more than just an
academic exercise. Since many drugs are excreted in the urine, a decline in renal function can lead to toxic
accumulations. Additionally, administration of appropriate drug dosages for those drugs primarily excreted by the
kidney requires an accurate assessment of GFR. GFR can be estimated closely by intravenous administration of
inulin. Inulin is a plant polysaccharide that is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the kidney. Its appearance in the
urine is directly proportional to the rate at which it is filtered by the renal corpuscle. However, since measuring inulin
clearance is cumbersome in the clinical setting, most often, the GFR is estimated by measuring naturally occurring
creatinine, a protein-derived molecule produced by muscle metabolism that is not reabsorbed and only slightly
secreted by the nephron.
25.6 Tubular Reabsorption
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List specific transport mechanisms occurring in different parts of the nephron, including active transport,
osmosis, facilitated diffusion, and passive electrochemical gradients
•
List the different membrane proteins of the nephron, including channels, transporters, and ATPase pumps
•
Compare and contrast passive and active tubular reabsorption
•
Explain why the differential permeability or impermeability of specific sections of the nephron tubules is
necessary for urine formation
•
Describe how and where water, organic compounds, and ions are reabsorbed in the nephron
•
Explain the role of the loop of Henle, the vasa recta, and the countercurrent multiplication mechanisms in the
concentration of urine
•
List the locations in the nephron where tubular secretion occurs
With up to 180 liters per day passing through the nephrons of the kidney, it is quite obvious that most of that fluid
and its contents must be reabsorbed. That recovery occurs in the PCT, loop of Henle, DCT, and the collecting ducts
(Table 25.5 and Figure 25.17). Various portions of the nephron differ in their capacity to reabsorb water and specific
solutes. While much of the reabsorption and secretion occur passively based on concentration gradients, the
amount of water that is reabsorbed or lost is tightly regulated. This control is exerted directly by ADH and
aldosterone, and indirectly by renin. Most water is recovered in the PCT, loop of Henle, and DCT. About 10 percent
(about 18 L) reaches the collecting ducts. The collecting ducts, under the influence of ADH, can recover almost all of
the water passing through them, in cases of dehydration, or almost none of the water, in cases of over-hydration.
1128
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 25.17
Locations of Secretion and Reabsorption in the Nephron
Substances Secreted or Reabsorbed in the Nephron and Their Locations
Substance
PCT
Loop of Henle
DCT
Collecting ducts
Glucose
Almost 100 percent
reabsorbed; secondary
active transport with Na+
Oligopeptides,
proteins,
amino acids
Almost 100 percent
reabsorbed; symport
with Na+
Vitamins
Reabsorbed
Lactate
Reabsorbed
Creatinine
Secreted
TABLE 25.5
25.6 • Tubular Reabsorption
1129
Substance
PCT
Loop of Henle
DCT
Collecting ducts
Urea
50 percent reabsorbed
by diffusion; also
secreted
Secretion, diffusion in
descending limb
Reabsorption in
medullary collecting
ducts; diffusion
Sodium
65 percent actively
reabsorbed
25 percent reabsorbed in
thick ascending limb;
active transport
5 percent
reabsorbed;
active
5 percent
reabsorbed,
stimulated by
aldosterone; active
Chloride
Reabsorbed, symport
with Na+, diffusion
Reabsorbed in thin and
thick ascending limb;
diffusion in ascending
limb
Reabsorbed;
diffusion
Reabsorbed;
symport
Water
67 percent reabsorbed
osmotically with solutes
15 percent reabsorbed in
descending limb; osmosis
8 percent
reabsorbed
if ADH;
osmosis
Variable amounts
reabsorbed,
controlled by ADH,
osmosis
HCO3-
80–90 percent symport
reabsorption with Na+
Reabsorbed, symport with
Na+ and antiport with Cl–;
in ascending limb
Reabsorbed antiport
with Cl–
H+
Secreted; diffusion
Secreted;
active
Secreted; active
NH4+
Secreted; diffusion
Secreted;
diffusion
Secreted; diffusion
Some drugs
Secreted
Secreted;
active
Secreted; active
Potassium
65 percent reabsorbed;
diffusion
20 percent reabsorbed in
thick ascending limb;
symport
Secreted;
active
Secretion controlled
by aldosterone;
active
Calcium
Reabsorbed; diffusion
Reabsorbed in thick
ascending limb; diffusion
Reabsorbed if
parathyroid
hormone present;
active
Magnesium
Reabsorbed; diffusion
Reabsorbed in thick
ascending limb; diffusion
Reabsorbed
Phosphate
85 percent reabsorbed,
inhibited by parathyroid
hormone, diffusion
Reabsorbed;
diffusion
TABLE 25.5
1130
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Mechanisms of Recovery
Mechanisms by which substances move across membranes for reabsorption or secretion include active transport,
diffusion, facilitated diffusion, secondary active transport, and osmosis. These were discussed in an earlier chapter,
and you may wish to review them.
Active transport utilizes energy, usually the energy found in a phosphate bond of ATP, to move a substance across a
membrane from a low to a high concentration. It is very specific and must have an appropriately shaped receptor for
the substance to be transported. An example would be the active transport of Na+ out of a cell and K+ into a cell by
the Na+/K+ pump. Both ions are moved in opposite directions from a lower to a higher concentration.
Simple diffusion moves a substance from a higher to a lower concentration down its concentration gradient. It
requires no energy and only needs to be soluble.
Facilitated diffusion is similar to diffusion in that it moves a substance down its concentration gradient. The
difference is that it requires specific membrane receptors or channel proteins for movement. The movement of
glucose and, in certain situations, Na+ ions, is an example of facilitated diffusion. In some cases of mediated
transport, two different substances share the same channel protein port; these mechanisms are described by the
terms symport and antiport.
Symport mechanisms move two or more substances in the same direction at the same time, whereas antiport
mechanisms move two or more substances in opposite directions across the cell membrane. Both mechanisms may
utilize concentration gradients maintained by ATP pumps. As described previously, when active transport powers
the transport of another substance in this way, it is called “secondary active transport.” Glucose reabsorption in the
kidneys is by secondary active transport. Na+/K+ ATPases on the basal membrane of a tubular cell constantly pump
Na+ out of the cell, maintaining a strong electrochemical gradient for Na+ to move into the cell from the tubular
lumen. On the luminal (apical) surface, a Na+/glucose symport protein assists both Na+ and glucose movement into
the cell. The cotransporter moves glucose into the cell against its concentration gradient as Na+ moves down the
electrochemical gradient created by the basal membranes Na+/K+ ATPases. The glucose molecule then diffuses
across the basal membrane by facilitated diffusion into the interstitial space and from there into peritubular
capillaries.
Most of the Ca++, Na+, glucose, and amino acids must be reabsorbed by the nephron to maintain homeostatic
plasma concentrations. Other substances, such as urea, K+, ammonia (NH3), creatinine, and some drugs are
secreted into the filtrate as waste products. Acid–base balance is maintained through actions of the lungs and
kidneys: The lungs rid the body of H+, whereas the kidneys secrete or reabsorb H+ and HCO3– (Table 25.6). In the
case of urea, about 50 percent is passively reabsorbed by the PCT. More is recovered by in the collecting ducts as
needed. ADH induces the insertion of urea transporters and aquaporin channel proteins.
Substances Filtered and Reabsorbed by the Kidney per 24 Hours
Substance
Amount filtered (grams)
Amount reabsorbed (grams)
Amount in urine (grams)
Water
180 L
179 L
1 L
Proteins
10–20
10–20
0
Chlorine
630
625
5
Sodium
540
537
3
Bicarbonate
300
299.7
0.3
Glucose
180
180
0
TABLE 25.6
25.6 • Tubular Reabsorption
1131
Substance
Amount filtered (grams)
Amount reabsorbed (grams)
Amount in urine (grams)
Urea
53
28
25
Potassium
28
24
4
Uric acid
8.5
7.7
0.8
Creatinine
1.4
0
1.4
TABLE 25.6
Reabsorption and Secretion in the PCT
The renal corpuscle filters the blood to create a filtrate that differs from blood mainly in the absence of cells and
large proteins. From this point to the ends of the collecting ducts, the filtrate or forming urine is undergoing
modification through secretion and reabsorption before true urine is produced. The first point at which the forming
urine is modified is in the PCT. Here, some substances are reabsorbed, whereas others are secreted. Note the use of
the term “reabsorbed.” All of these substances were “absorbed” in the digestive tract—99 percent of the water and
most of the solutes filtered by the nephron must be reabsorbed. Water and substances that are reabsorbed are
returned to the circulation by the peritubular and vasa recta capillaries. It is important to understand the difference
between the glomerulus and the peritubular and vasa recta capillaries. The glomerulus has a relatively high
pressure inside its capillaries and can sustain this by dilating the afferent arteriole while constricting the efferent
arteriole. This assures adequate filtration pressure even as the systemic blood pressure varies. Movement of water
into the peritubular capillaries and vasa recta will be influenced primarily by osmolarity and concentration gradients.
Sodium is actively pumped out of the PCT into the interstitial spaces between cells and diffuses down its
concentration gradient into the peritubular capillary. As it does so, water will follow passively to maintain an isotonic
fluid environment inside the capillary. This is called obligatory water reabsorption, because water is “obliged” to
follow the Na+ (Figure 25.18).
FIGURE 25.18
Substances Reabsorbed and Secreted by the PCT
1132
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
More substances move across the membranes of the PCT than any other portion of the nephron. Many of these
substances (amino acids and glucose) use symport mechanisms for transport along with Na+. Antiport, active
transport, diffusion, and facilitated diffusion are additional mechanisms by which substances are moved from one
side of a membrane to the other. Recall that cells have two surfaces: apical and basal. The apical surface is the one
facing the lumen or open space of a cavity or tube, in this case, the inside of the PCT. The basal surface of the cell
faces the connective tissue base to which the cell attaches (basement membrane) or the cell membrane closer to
the basement membrane if there is a stratified layer of cells. In the PCT, there is a single layer of simple cuboidal
endothelial cells against the basement membrane. The numbers and particular types of pumps and channels vary
between the apical and basilar surfaces. A few of the substances that are transported with Na+ (symport
mechanism) on the apical membrane include Cl–, Ca++, amino acids, glucose, and
. Sodium is actively
exchanged for K+ using ATP on the basal membrane. Most of the substances transported by a symport mechanism
on the apical membrane are transported by facilitated diffusion on the basal membrane. At least three ions, K+,
Ca++, and Mg++, diffuse laterally between adjacent cell membranes (transcellular).
About 67 percent of the water, Na+, and K+ entering the nephron is reabsorbed in the PCT and returned to the
circulation. Almost 100 percent of glucose, amino acids, and other organic substances such as vitamins are normally
recovered here. Some glucose may appear in the urine if circulating glucose levels are high enough that all the
glucose transporters in the PCT are saturated, so that their capacity to move glucose is exceeded (transport
maximum, or Tm). In males, the maximum amount of glucose that can be recovered is about 375 mg/min, whereas
in females, it is about 300 mg/min. This recovery rate translates to an arterial concentration of about 200 mg/dL.
Though an exceptionally high sugar intake might cause sugar to appear briefly in the urine, the appearance of
glycosuria usually points to type I or II diabetes mellitus. The transport of glucose from the lumen of the PCT to the
interstitial space is similar to the way it is absorbed by the small intestine. Both glucose and Na+ bind
simultaneously to the same symport proteins on the apical surface of the cell to be transported in the same
direction, toward the interstitial space. Sodium moves down its electrochemical and concentration gradient into the
cell and takes glucose with it. Na+ is then actively pumped out of the cell at the basal surface of the cell into the
interstitial space. Glucose leaves the cell to enter the interstitial space by facilitated diffusion. The energy to move
glucose comes from the Na+/K+ ATPase that pumps Na+ out of the cell on the basal surface. Fifty percent of Cl– and
variable quantities of Ca++, Mg++, and
are also recovered in the PCT.
Recovery of bicarbonate (HCO3–) is vital to the maintenance of acid–base balance, since it is a very powerful and
fast-acting buffer. An important enzyme is used to catalyze this mechanism: carbonic anhydrase (CA). This same
enzyme and reaction is used in red blood cells in the transportation of CO2, in the stomach to produce hydrochloric
acid, and in the pancreas to produce HCO3– to buffer acidic chyme from the stomach. In the kidney, most of the CA
is located within the cell, but a small amount is bound to the brush border of the membrane on the apical surface of
the cell. In the lumen of the PCT, HCO3– combines with hydrogen ions to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). This is
enzymatically catalyzed into CO2 and water, which diffuse across the apical membrane into the cell. Water can move
osmotically across the lipid bilayer membrane due to the presence of aquaporin water channels. Inside the cell, the
reverse reaction occurs to produce bicarbonate ions (HCO3–). These bicarbonate ions are cotransported with Na+
across the basal membrane to the interstitial space around the PCT (Figure 25.19). At the same time this is
occurring, a Na+/H+ antiporter excretes H+ into the lumen, while it recovers Na+. Note how the hydrogen ion is
recycled so that bicarbonate can be recovered. Also, note that a Na+ gradient is created by the Na+/K+ pump.
The significant recovery of solutes from the PCT lumen to the interstitial space creates an osmotic gradient that
promotes water recovery. As noted before, water moves through channels created by the aquaporin proteins. These
proteins are found in all cells in varying amounts and help regulate water movement across membranes and through
cells by creating a passageway across the hydrophobic lipid bilayer membrane. Changing the number of aquaporin
proteins in membranes of the collecting ducts also helps to regulate the osmolarity of the blood. The movement of
many positively charged ions also creates an electrochemical gradient. This charge promotes the movement of
negative ions toward the interstitial spaces and the movement of positive ions toward the lumen.
25.6 • Tubular Reabsorption
1133
FIGURE 25.19
Reabsorption of Bicarbonate from the PCT
Reabsorption and Secretion in the Loop of Henle
The loop of Henle consists of two sections: thick and thin descending and thin and thick ascending sections. The
loops of cortical nephrons do not extend into the renal medulla very far, if at all. Juxtamedullary nephrons have
loops that extend variable distances, some very deep into the medulla. The descending and ascending portions of
the loop are highly specialized to enable recovery of much of the Na+ and water that were filtered by the glomerulus.
As the forming urine moves through the loop, the osmolarity will change from isosmotic with blood (about 278–300
mOsmol/kg) to both a very hypertonic solution of about 1200 mOsmol/kg and a very hypotonic solution of about
100 mOsmol/kg. These changes are accomplished by osmosis in the descending limb and active transport in the
ascending limb. Solutes and water recovered from these loops are returned to the circulation by way of the vasa
recta.
Descending Loop
The majority of the descending loop is comprised of simple squamous epithelial cells; to simplify the function of the
loop, this discussion focuses on these cells. These membranes have permanent aquaporin channel proteins that
allow unrestricted movement of water from the descending loop into the surrounding interstitium as osmolarity
increases from about 300 mOsmol/kg to about 1200 mOsmol/kg in the filtrate. This increase results in reabsorption
of up to 15 percent of the water entering the nephron. Modest amounts of urea, Na+, and other ions are also
recovered here.
Most of the solutes that were filtered in the glomerulus have now been recovered along with a majority of water,
about 82 percent. As the forming urine enters the ascending loop, major adjustments will be made to the
concentration of solutes to create what you perceive as urine.
Ascending Loop
The ascending loop is made of very short thin and longer thick portions. Once again, to simplify the function, this
section only considers the thick portion. The thick portion is lined with simple cuboidal epithelium without a brush
border. It is completely impermeable to water due to the absence of aquaporin proteins, but ions, mainly Na+ and
CL–, are actively reabsorbed by a cotransport system. This has two significant effects: Removal of NaCl while
retaining water leads to a hypoosomotic filtrate by the time it reaches the DCT; pumping NaCl into the interstitial
space contributes to the hyperosmotic environment in the kidney medulla.
The Na+/K+ ATPase pumps in the basal membrane create an electrochemical gradient, allowing reabsorption of Cl–
by Na+/Cl– symporters in the apical membrane. At the same time that Na+ is actively pumped from the basal side of
the cell into the interstitial fluid, Cl– follows the Na+ from the lumen into the interstitial fluid by a paracellular route
between cells through leaky tight junctions. These are found between cells of the ascending loop, where they allow
certain solutes to move according to their concentration gradient. Most of the K+ that enters the cell via symporters
returns to the lumen (down its concentration gradient) through leaky channels in the apical membrane. Note the
environment now created in the interstitial space: With the “back door exiting” K+, there is one Na+ and two Cl– ions
left in the interstitium surrounding the ascending loop. Therefore, in comparison to the lumen of the loop, the
1134
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
interstitial space is now a negatively charged environment. This negative charge attracts cations (Na+, K+, Ca++, and
Mg++) from the lumen via a paracellular route to the interstitial space and vasa recta.
Countercurrent Multiplier System
The structure of the loop of Henle and associated vasa recta create a countercurrent multiplier system (Figure
25.20). The countercurrent term comes from the fact that the descending and ascending loops are next to each
other and their fluid flows in opposite directions (countercurrent). The multiplier term is due to the action of solute
pumps that increase (multiply) the concentrations of urea and Na+ deep in the medulla.
FIGURE 25.20
Countercurrent Multiplier System
As discussed above, the ascending loop actively reabsorbs NaCl out of the forming urine into the interstitial spaces.
In addition, collecting ducts have urea pumps that actively pump urea into the interstitial spaces. This results in the
recovery of NaCl to the circulation via the vasa recta and creates a high osmolar environment in the depths of the
medulla.
Ammonia (NH3) is a toxic byproduct of protein metabolism. It is formed as amino acids are deaminated by liver
hepatocytes. That means that the amine group, NH2, is removed from amino acids as they are broken down. Most of
the resulting ammonia is converted into urea by liver hepatocytes. Urea is not only less toxic but is utilized to aid in
the recovery of water by the loop of Henle and collecting ducts. At the same time that water is freely diffusing out of
the descending loop through aquaporin channels into the interstitial spaces of the medulla, urea freely diffuses into
the lumen of the descending loop as it descends deeper into the medulla, much of it to be reabsorbed from the
forming urine when it reaches the collecting duct. Thus, the movement of Na+ and urea into the interstitial spaces by
these mechanisms creates the hyperosmotic environment of the medulla. The net result of this countercurrent
multiplier system is to recover both water and Na+ in the circulation.
The amino acid glutamine can be deaminated by the kidney. As NH2 from the amino acid is converted into NH3 and
pumped into the lumen of the PCT, Na+ and HCO3– are excreted into the interstitial fluid of the renal pyramid via a
symport mechanism. When this process occurs in the cells of the PCT, the added benefit is a net loss of a hydrogen
ion (complexed to ammonia to form the weak acid NH4+) in the urine and a gain of a bicarbonate ion (HCO3–) in the
blood. Ammonia and bicarbonate are exchanged in a one-to-one ratio. This exchange is yet another means by which
the body can buffer and excrete acid. The presence of aquaporin channels in the descending loop allows prodigious
25.6 • Tubular Reabsorption
1135
quantities of water to leave the loop and enter the hyperosmolar interstitium of the pyramid, where it is returned to
the circulation by the vasa recta. As the loop turns to become the ascending loop, there is an absence of aquaporin
channels, so water cannot leave the loop. However, in the basal membrane of cells of the thick ascending loop,
ATPase pumps actively remove Na+ from the cell. A Na+/K+/2Cl– symporter in the apical membrane passively allows
these ions to enter the cell cytoplasm from the lumen of the loop down a concentration gradient created by the
pump. This mechanism works to dilute the fluid of the ascending loop ultimately to approximately 50–100 mOsmol/
L.
At the transition from the DCT to the collecting duct, about 20 percent of the original water is still present and about
10 percent of the sodium. If no other mechanism for water reabsorption existed, about 20–25 liters of urine would
be produced. Now consider what is happening in the adjacent capillaries, the vasa recta. They are recovering both
solutes and water at a rate that preserves the countercurrent multiplier system. In general, blood flows slowly in
capillaries to allow time for exchange of nutrients and wastes. In the vasa recta particularly, this rate of flow is
important for two additional reasons. The flow must be slow to allow blood cells to lose and regain water without
either crenating or bursting. Second, a rapid flow would remove too much Na+ and urea, destroying the osmolar
gradient that is necessary for the recovery of solutes and water. Thus, by flowing slowly to preserve the
countercurrent mechanism, as the vasa recta descend, Na+ and urea are freely able to enter the capillary, while
water freely leaves; as they ascend, Na+ and urea are secreted into the surrounding medulla, while water reenters
and is removed.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/multiplier) to learn about the countercurrent multiplier system.
Reabsorption and Secretion in the Distal Convoluted Tubule
Approximately 80 percent of filtered water has been recovered by the time the dilute forming urine enters the DCT.
The DCT will recover another 10–15 percent before the forming urine enters the collecting ducts. Aldosterone
increases the amount of Na+/K+ ATPase in the basal membrane of the DCT and collecting duct. The movement of
Na+ out of the lumen of the collecting duct creates a negative charge that promotes the movement of Cl– out of the
lumen into the interstitial space by a paracellular route across tight junctions. Peritubular capillaries receive the
solutes and water, returning them to the circulation.
Cells of the DCT also recover Ca++ from the filtrate. Receptors for parathyroid hormone (PTH) are found in DCT cells
and when bound to PTH, induce the insertion of calcium channels on their luminal surface. The channels enhance
Ca++ recovery from the forming urine. In addition, as Na+ is pumped out of the cell, the resulting electrochemical
gradient attracts Ca++ into the cell. Finally, calcitriol (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D, the active form of vitamin D) is very
important for calcium recovery. It induces the production of calcium-binding proteins that transport Ca++ into the
cell. These binding proteins are also important for the movement of calcium inside the cell and aid in exocytosis of
calcium across the basolateral membrane. Any Ca++ not reabsorbed at this point is lost in the urine.
Collecting Ducts and Recovery of Water
Solutes move across the membranes of the collecting ducts, which contain two distinct cell types, principal cells
and intercalated cells. A principal cell possesses channels for the recovery or loss of sodium and potassium. An
intercalated cell secretes or absorbs acid or bicarbonate. As in other portions of the nephron, there is an array of
micromachines (pumps and channels) on display in the membranes of these cells.
Regulation of urine volume and osmolarity are major functions of the collecting ducts. By varying the amount of
water that is recovered, the collecting ducts play a major role in maintaining the body’s normal osmolarity. If the
blood becomes hyperosmotic, the collecting ducts recover more water to dilute the blood; if the blood becomes
hyposmotic, the collecting ducts recover less of the water, leading to concentration of the blood. Another way of
saying this is: If plasma osmolarity rises, more water is recovered and urine volume decreases; if plasma osmolarity
decreases, less water is recovered and urine volume increases. This function is regulated by the posterior pituitary
hormone ADH (vasopressin). With mild dehydration, plasma osmolarity rises slightly. This increase is detected by
osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, which stimulates the release of ADH from the posterior pituitary. If plasma
osmolarity decreases slightly, the opposite occurs.
1136
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
When stimulated by ADH, aquaporin channels are inserted into the apical membrane of principal cells, which line
the collecting ducts. As the ducts descend through the medulla, the osmolarity surrounding them increases (due to
the countercurrent mechanisms described above). If aquaporin water channels are present, water will be
osmotically pulled from the collecting duct into the surrounding interstitial space and into the peritubular capillaries.
Therefore, the final urine will be more concentrated. If less ADH is secreted, fewer aquaporin channels are inserted
and less water is recovered, resulting in dilute urine. By altering the number of aquaporin channels, the volume of
water recovered or lost is altered. This, in turn, regulates the blood osmolarity, blood pressure, and osmolarity of the
urine.
As Na+ is pumped from the forming urine, water is passively recaptured for the circulation; this preservation of
vascular volume is critically important for the maintenance of a normal blood pressure. Aldosterone is secreted by
the adrenal cortex in response to angiotensin II stimulation. As an extremely potent vasoconstrictor, angiotensin II
functions immediately to increase blood pressure. By also stimulating aldosterone production, it provides a longer-
lasting mechanism to support blood pressure by maintaining vascular volume (water recovery).
In addition to receptors for ADH, principal cells have receptors for the steroid hormone aldosterone. While ADH is
primarily involved in the regulation of water recovery, aldosterone regulates Na+ recovery. Aldosterone stimulates
principal cells to manufacture luminal Na+ and K+ channels as well as Na+/K+ ATPase pumps on the basal
membrane of the cells. When aldosterone output increases, more Na+ is recovered from the forming urine and water
follows the Na+ passively. As the pump recovers Na+ for the body, it is also pumping K+ into the forming urine, since
the pump moves K+ in the opposite direction. When aldosterone decreases, more Na+ remains in the forming urine
and more K+ is recovered in the circulation. Symport channels move Na+ and Cl– together. Still other channels in the
principal cells secrete K+ into the collecting duct in direct proportion to the recovery of Na+.
Intercalated cells play significant roles in regulating blood pH. Intercalated cells reabsorb K+ and HCO3– while
secreting H+. This function lowers the acidity of the plasma while increasing the acidity of the urine.
25.7 Regulation of Renal Blood Flow
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the myogenic and tubuloglomerular feedback mechanisms and explain how they affect urine volume
and composition
•
Describe the function of the juxtaglomerular apparatus
It is vital that the flow of blood through the kidney be at a suitable rate to allow for filtration. This rate determines
how much solute is retained or discarded, how much water is retained or discarded, and ultimately, the osmolarity
of blood and the blood pressure of the body.
Sympathetic Nerves
The kidneys are innervated by the sympathetic neurons of the autonomic nervous system via the celiac plexus and
splanchnic nerves. Reduction of sympathetic stimulation results in vasodilation and increased blood flow through
the kidneys during resting conditions. When the frequency of action potentials increases, the arteriolar smooth
muscle constricts (vasoconstriction), resulting in diminished glomerular flow, so less filtration occurs. Under
conditions of stress, sympathetic nervous activity increases, resulting in the direct vasoconstriction of afferent
arterioles (norepinephrine effect) as well as stimulation of the adrenal medulla. The adrenal medulla, in turn,
produces a generalized vasoconstriction through the release of epinephrine. This includes vasoconstriction of the
afferent arterioles, further reducing the volume of blood flowing through the kidneys. This process redirects blood to
other organs with more immediate needs. If blood pressure falls, the sympathetic nerves will also stimulate the
release of renin. Additional renin increases production of the powerful vasoconstrictor angiotensin II. Angiotensin
II, as discussed above, will also stimulate aldosterone production to augment blood volume through retention of
more Na+ and water. Only a 10 mm Hg pressure differential across the glomerulus is required for normal GFR, so
very small changes in afferent arterial pressure significantly increase or decrease GFR.
Autoregulation
The kidneys are very effective at regulating the rate of blood flow over a wide range of blood pressures. Your blood
25.7 • Regulation of Renal Blood Flow
1137
pressure will decrease when you are relaxed or sleeping. It will increase when exercising. Yet, despite these
changes, the filtration rate through the kidney will change very little. This is due to two internal autoregulatory
mechanisms that operate without outside influence: the myogenic mechanism and the tubuloglomerular feedback
mechanism.
Arteriole Myogenic Mechanism
The myogenic mechanism regulating blood flow within the kidney depends upon a characteristic shared by most
smooth muscle cells of the body. When you stretch a smooth muscle cell, it contracts; when you stop, it relaxes,
restoring its resting length. This mechanism works in the afferent arteriole that supplies the glomerulus. When blood
pressure increases, smooth muscle cells in the wall of the arteriole are stretched and respond by contracting to
resist the pressure, resulting in little change in flow. When blood pressure drops, the same smooth muscle cells
relax to lower resistance, allowing a continued even flow of blood.
Tubuloglomerular Feedback
The tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism involves the JGA and a paracrine signaling mechanism utilizing ATP,
adenosine, and nitric oxide (NO). This mechanism stimulates either contraction or relaxation of afferent arteriolar
smooth muscle cells (Table 25.7). Recall that the DCT is in intimate contact with the afferent and efferent arterioles
of the glomerulus. Specialized macula densa cells in this segment of the tubule respond to changes in the fluid flow
rate and Na+ concentration. As GFR increases, there is less time for NaCl to be reabsorbed in the PCT, resulting in
higher osmolarity in the filtrate. The increased fluid movement more strongly deflects single nonmotile cilia on
macula densa cells. This increased osmolarity of the forming urine, and the greater flow rate within the DCT,
activates macula densa cells to respond by releasing ATP and adenosine (a metabolite of ATP). ATP and adenosine
act locally as paracrine factors to stimulate the myogenic juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole to constrict,
slowing blood flow and reducing GFR. Conversely, when GFR decreases, less Na+ is in the forming urine, and most
will be reabsorbed before reaching the macula densa, which will result in decreased ATP and adenosine, allowing
the afferent arteriole to dilate and increase GFR. NO has the opposite effect, relaxing the afferent arteriole at the
same time ATP and adenosine are stimulating it to contract. Thus, NO fine-tunes the effects of adenosine and ATP
on GFR.
Paracrine Mechanisms Controlling Glomerular Filtration Rate
Change in
GFR
NaCl Absorption
Role of ATP and adenosine/Role of NO
Effect on GFR
Increased
GFR
Tubular NaCl
increases
ATP and adenosine increase, causing
vasoconstriction
Vasoconstriction slows
GFR
Decreased
GFR
Tubular NaCl
decreases
ATP and adenosine decrease, causing
vasodilation
Vasodilation increases
GFR
Increased
GFR
Tubular NaCl
increases
NO increases, causing vasodilation
Vasodilation increases
GFR
Decreased
GFR
Tubular NaCl
decreases
NO decreases, causing vasoconstricton
Vasoconstriction
decreases GFR
TABLE 25.7
1138
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
25.8 Endocrine Regulation of Kidney Function
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe how each of the following functions in the extrinsic control of GFR: renin–angiotensin mechanism,
natriuretic peptides, and sympathetic adrenergic activity
•
Describe how each of the following works to regulate reabsorption and secretion, so as to affect urine volume
and composition: renin–angiotensin system, aldosterone, antidiuretic hormone, and natriuretic peptides
•
Name and define the roles of other hormones that regulate kidney control
Several hormones have specific, important roles in regulating kidney function. They act to stimulate or inhibit blood
flow. Some of these are endocrine, acting from a distance, whereas others are paracrine, acting locally.
Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone
Renin is an enzyme that is produced by the juxtaglomerular (JG) cells of the afferent arteriole at the JGA. It
enzymatically converts angiotensinogen (made by the liver, freely circulating) into angiotensin I. Its release is
stimulated by prostaglandins and NO from the JGA in response to decreased extracellular fluid volume.
ACE is not a hormone but it is functionally important in regulating systemic blood pressure and kidney function. It is
produced in the lungs but binds to the surfaces of endothelial cells in the afferent arterioles and glomerulus. It
enzymatically converts inactive angiotensin I into active angiotensin II. ACE is important in raising blood pressure.
People with high blood pressure are sometimes prescribed ACE inhibitors to lower their blood pressure.
Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor that plays an immediate role in the regulation of blood pressure. It acts
systemically to cause vasoconstriction as well as constriction of both the afferent and efferent arterioles of the
glomerulus. In instances of blood loss or dehydration, it reduces both GFR and renal blood flow, thereby limiting
fluid loss and preserving blood volume. Its release is usually stimulated by decreases in blood pressure, and so the
preservation of adequate blood pressure is its primary role.
Aldosterone, often called the “salt-retaining hormone,” is released from the adrenal cortex in response to
angiotensin II or directly in response to increased plasma K+. It promotes Na+ reabsorption by the nephron,
promoting the retention of water. It is also important in regulating K+, promoting its excretion. (This dual effect on
two minerals and its origin in the adrenal cortex explains its designation as a mineralocorticoid.) As a result, renin
has an immediate effect on blood pressure due to angiotensin II–stimulated vasoconstriction and a prolonged effect
through Na+ recovery due to aldosterone. At the same time that aldosterone causes increased recovery of Na+, it
also causes greater loss of K+. Progesterone is a steroid that is structurally similar to aldosterone. It binds to the
aldosterone receptor and weakly stimulates Na+ reabsorption and increased water recovery. This process is
unimportant in males due to low levels of circulating progesterone. It may cause increased retention of water during
some periods of the menstrual cycle in females when progesterone levels increase.
Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
Diuretics are drugs that can increase water loss by interfering with the recapture of solutes and water from the
forming urine. They are often prescribed to lower blood pressure. Coffee, tea, and alcoholic beverages are familiar
diuretics. ADH, a 9-amino acid peptide released by the posterior pituitary, works to do the exact opposite. It
promotes the recovery of water, decreases urine volume, and maintains plasma osmolarity and blood pressure. It
does so by stimulating the movement of aquaporin proteins into the apical cell membrane of principal cells of the
collecting ducts to form water channels, allowing the transcellular movement of water from the lumen of the
collecting duct into the interstitial space in the medulla of the kidney by osmosis. From there, it enters the vasa
recta capillaries to return to the circulation. Water is attracted by the high osmotic environment of the deep kidney
medulla.
Endothelin
Endothelins, 21-amino acid peptides, are extremely powerful vasoconstrictors. They are produced by endothelial
cells of the renal blood vessels, mesangial cells, and cells of the DCT. Hormones stimulating endothelin release
include angiotensin II, bradykinin, and epinephrine. They do not typically influence blood pressure in healthy
25.8 • Endocrine Regulation of Kidney Function
1139
people. On the other hand, in people with diabetic kidney disease, endothelin is chronically elevated, resulting in
sodium retention. They also diminish GFR by damaging the podocytes and by potently vasoconstricting both the
afferent and efferent arterioles.
Natriuretic Hormones
Natriuretic hormones are peptides that stimulate the kidneys to excrete sodium—an effect opposite that of
aldosterone. Natriuretic hormones act by inhibiting aldosterone release and therefore inhibiting Na+ recovery in the
collecting ducts. If Na+ remains in the forming urine, its osmotic force will cause a concurrent loss of water.
Natriuretic hormones also inhibit ADH release, which of course will result in less water recovery. Therefore,
natriuretic peptides inhibit both Na+ and water recovery. One example from this family of hormones is atrial
natriuretic hormone (ANH), a 28-amino acid peptide produced by heart atria in response to over-stretching of the
atrial wall. The over-stretching occurs in persons with elevated blood pressure or heart failure. It increases GFR
through concurrent vasodilation of the afferent arteriole and vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole. These events
lead to an increased loss of water and sodium in the forming urine. It also decreases sodium reabsorption in the
DCT. There is also B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 32 amino acids produced in the ventricles of the heart. It has a
10-fold lower affinity for its receptor, so its effects are less than those of ANH. Its role may be to provide “fine
tuning” for the regulation of blood pressure. BNP’s longer biologic half-life makes it a good diagnostic marker of
congestive heart failure (Figure 25.21).
Parathyroid Hormone
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an 84-amino acid peptide produced by the parathyroid glands in response to
decreased circulating Ca++ levels. Among its targets is the PCT, where it stimulates the hydroxylation of calcidiol to
calcitriol (1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol, the active form of vitamin D). It also blocks reabsorption of phosphate
(PO3–), causing its loss in the urine. The retention of phosphate would result in the formation of calcium phosphate
in the plasma, reducing circulating Ca++ levels. By ridding the blood of phosphate, higher circulating Ca++ levels are
permitted.
FIGURE 25.21
Major Hormones That Influence GFR and RFB
1140
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
25.9 Regulation of Fluid Volume and Composition
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the mechanism of action of diuretics
•
Explain why the differential permeability or impermeability of specific sections of the nephron tubules is
necessary for urine formation
The major hormones influencing total body water are ADH, aldosterone, and ANH. Circumstances that lead to fluid
depletion in the body include blood loss and dehydration. Homeostasis requires that volume and osmolarity be
preserved. Blood volume is important in maintaining sufficient blood pressure, and there are nonrenal mechanisms
involved in its preservation, including vasoconstriction, which can act within seconds of a drop in pressure. Thirst
mechanisms are also activated to promote the consumption of water lost through respiration, evaporation, or
urination. Hormonal mechanisms are activated to recover volume while maintaining a normal osmotic environment.
These mechanisms act principally on the kidney.
Volume-sensing Mechanisms
The body cannot directly measure blood volume, but blood pressure can be measured. Blood pressure often reflects
blood volume and is measured by baroreceptors in the aorta and carotid sinuses. When blood pressure increases,
baroreceptors send more frequent action potentials to the central nervous system, leading to widespread
vasodilation. Included in this vasodilation are the afferent arterioles supplying the glomerulus, resulting in increased
GFR, and water loss by the kidneys. If pressure decreases, fewer action potentials travel to the central nervous
system, resulting in more sympathetic stimulation-producing vasoconstriction, which will result in decreased
filtration and GFR, and water loss.
Decreased blood pressure is also sensed by the granular cells in the afferent arteriole of the JGA. In response, the
enzyme renin is released. You saw earlier in the chapter that renin activity leads to an almost immediate rise in
blood pressure as activated angiotensin II produces vasoconstriction. The rise in pressure is sustained by the
aldosterone effects initiated by angiotensin II; this includes an increase in Na+ retention and water volume. As an
aside, late in the menstrual cycle, progesterone has a modest influence on water retention. Due to its structural
similarity to aldosterone, progesterone binds to the aldosterone receptor in the collecting duct of the kidney,
causing the same, albeit weaker, effect on Na+ and water retention.
Cardiomyocytes of the atria also respond to greater stretch (as blood pressure rises) by secreting ANH. ANH
opposes the action of aldosterone by inhibiting the recovery of Na+ by the DCT and collecting ducts. More Na+ is lost,
and as water follows, total blood volume and pressure decline. In low-pressure states, ANH does not seem to have
much effect.
ADH is also called vasopressin. Early researchers found that in cases of unusually high secretion of ADH, the
hormone caused vasoconstriction (vasopressor activity, hence the name). Only later were its antidiuretic properties
identified. Synthetic ADH is still used occasionally to stem life-threatening esophagus bleeding in alcoholics.
When blood volume drops 5–10 percent, causing a decrease in blood pressure, there is a rapid and significant
increase in ADH release from the posterior pituitary. Immediate vasoconstriction to increase blood pressure is the
result. ADH also causes activation of aquaporin channels in the collecting ducts to affect the recovery of water to
help restore vascular volume.
Diuretics and Fluid Volume
A diuretic is a compound that increases urine volume. Three familiar drinks contain diuretic compounds: coffee, tea,
and alcohol. The caffeine in coffee and tea works by promoting vasodilation in the nephron, which increases GFR.
Alcohol increases GFR by inhibiting ADH release from the posterior pituitary, resulting in less water recovery by the
collecting duct. In cases of high blood pressure, diuretics may be prescribed to reduce blood volume and, thereby,
reduce blood pressure. The most frequently prescribed anti-hypertensive diuretic is hydrochlorothiazide. It inhibits
the Na+/ Cl– symporter in the DCT and collecting duct. The result is a loss of Na+ with water following passively by
osmosis.
25.9 • Regulation of Fluid Volume and Composition
1141
Osmotic diuretics promote water loss by osmosis. An example is the indigestible sugar mannitol, which is most
often administered to reduce brain swelling after head injury. However, it is not the only sugar that can produce a
diuretic effect. In cases of poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, glucose levels exceed the capacity of the tubular
glucose symporters, resulting in glucose in the urine. The unrecovered glucose becomes a powerful osmotic
diuretic. Classically, in the days before glucose could be detected in the blood and urine, clinicians identified
diabetes mellitus by the three Ps: polyuria (diuresis), polydipsia (increased thirst), and polyphagia (increased
hunger).
Regulation of Extracellular Na+
Sodium has a very strong osmotic effect and attracts water. It plays a larger role in the osmolarity of the plasma than
any other circulating component of the blood. If there is too much Na+ present, either due to poor control or excess
dietary consumption, a series of metabolic problems ensue. There is an increase in total volume of water, which
leads to hypertension (high blood pressure). Over a long period, this increases the risk of serious complications such
as heart attacks, strokes, and aneurysms. It can also contribute to system-wide edema (swelling).
Mechanisms for regulating Na+ concentration include the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and ADH (see
Figure 25.14). Aldosterone stimulates the uptake of Na+ on the apical cell membrane of cells in the DCT and
collecting ducts, whereas ADH helps to regulate Na+ concentration indirectly by regulating the reabsorption of
water.
Regulation of Extracellular K+
Potassium is present in a 30-fold greater concentration inside the cell than outside the cell. A generalization can be
made that K+ and Na+ concentrations will move in opposite directions. When more Na+ is reabsorbed, more K+ is
secreted; when less Na+ is reabsorbed (leading to excretion by the kidney), more K+ is retained. When aldosterone
causes a recovery of Na+ in the nephron, a negative electrical gradient is created that promotes the secretion of K+
and Cl– into the lumen.
Regulation of Cl–
Chloride is important in acid–base balance in the extracellular space and has other functions, such as in the
stomach, where it combines with hydrogen ions in the stomach lumen to form hydrochloric acid, aiding digestion. Its
close association with Na+ in the extracellular environment makes it the dominant anion of this compartment, and
its regulation closely mirrors that of Na+.
Regulation of Ca++ and Phosphate
The parathyroid glands monitor and respond to circulating levels of Ca++ in the blood. When levels drop too low, PTH
is released to stimulate the DCT to reabsorb Ca++ from the forming urine. When levels are adequate or high, less PTH
is released and more Ca++ remains in the forming urine to be lost. Phosphate levels move in the opposite direction.
When Ca++ levels are low, PTH inhibits reabsorption of
so that its blood level drops, allowing Ca++ levels to
rise. PTH also stimulates the renal conversion of calcidiol into calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol then
stimulates the intestines to absorb more Ca++ from the diet.
Regulation of H+, Bicarbonate, and pH
The acid–base homeostasis of the body is a function of chemical buffers and physiologic buffering provided by the
lungs and kidneys. Buffers, especially proteins,
, and ammonia have a very large capacity to absorb or
release H+ as needed to resist a change in pH. They can act within fractions of a second. The lungs can rid the body
of excess acid very rapidly (seconds to minutes) through the conversion of HCO3– into CO2, which is then exhaled. It
is rapid but has limited capacity in the face of a significant acid challenge. The kidneys can rid the body of both acid
and base. The renal capacity is large but slow (minutes to hours). The cells of the PCT actively secrete H+ into the
forming urine as Na+ is reabsorbed. The body rids itself of excess H+ and raises blood pH. In the collecting ducts, the
apical surfaces of intercalated cells have proton pumps that actively secrete H+ into the luminal, forming urine to
remove it from the body.
As hydrogen ions are pumped into the forming urine, it is buffered by bicarbonate (HCO3–), H2PO4– (dihydrogen
phosphate ion), or ammonia (forming NH4+, ammonium ion). Urine pH typically varies in a normal range from 4.5 to
1142
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
8.0.
Regulation of Nitrogen Wastes
Nitrogen wastes are produced by the breakdown of proteins during normal metabolism. Proteins are broken down
into amino acids, which in turn are deaminated by having their nitrogen groups removed. Deamination converts the
amino (NH2) groups into ammonia (NH3), ammonium ion (NH4+), urea, or uric acid (Figure 25.22). Ammonia is
extremely toxic, so most of it is very rapidly converted into urea in the liver. Human urinary wastes typically contain
primarily urea with small amounts of ammonium and very little uric acid.
FIGURE 25.22
Nitrogen Wastes
Elimination of Drugs and Hormones
Water-soluble drugs may be excreted in the urine and are influenced by one or all of the following processes:
glomerular filtration, tubular secretion, or tubular reabsorption. Drugs that are structurally small can be filtered by
the glomerulus with the filtrate. Large drug molecules such as heparin or those that are bound to plasma proteins
cannot be filtered and are not readily eliminated. Some drugs can be eliminated by carrier proteins that enable
secretion of the drug into the tubule lumen. There are specific carriers that eliminate basic (such as dopamine or
histamine) or acidic drugs (such as penicillin or indomethacin). As is the case with other substances, drugs may be
both filtered and reabsorbed passively along a concentration gradient.
25.10 The Urinary System and Homeostasis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the role of the kidneys in vitamin D activation
•
Describe the role of the kidneys in regulating erythropoiesis
•
Provide specific examples to demonstrate how the urinary system responds to maintain homeostasis in the
body
•
Explain how the urinary system relates to other body systems in maintaining homeostasis
•
Predict factors or situations affecting the urinary system that could disrupt homeostasis
•
Predict the types of problems that would occur in the body if the urinary system could not maintain
homeostasis
All systems of the body are interrelated. A change in one system may affect all other systems in the body, with mild
to devastating effects. A failure of urinary continence can be embarrassing and inconvenient, but is not life
threatening. The loss of other urinary functions may prove fatal. A failure to synthesize vitamin D is one such
example.
Vitamin D Synthesis
In order for vitamin D to become active, it must undergo a hydroxylation reaction in the kidney, that is, an –OH group
must be added to calcidiol to make calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol). Activated vitamin D is important for
25.10 • The Urinary System and Homeostasis
1143
absorption of Ca++ in the digestive tract, its reabsorption in the kidney, and the maintenance of normal serum
concentrations of Ca++ and phosphate. Calcium is vitally important in bone health, muscle contraction, hormone
secretion, and neurotransmitter release. Inadequate Ca++ leads to disorders like osteoporosis and osteomalacia in
adults and rickets in children. Deficits may also result in problems with cell proliferation, neuromuscular function,
blood clotting, and the inflammatory response. Recent research has confirmed that vitamin D receptors are present
in most, if not all, cells of the body, reflecting the systemic importance of vitamin D. Many scientists have suggested
it be referred to as a hormone rather than a vitamin.
Erythropoiesis
EPO is a 193-amino acid protein that stimulates the formation of red blood cells in the bone marrow. The kidney
produces 85 percent of circulating EPO; the liver, the remainder. If you move to a higher altitude, the partial
pressure of oxygen is lower, meaning there is less pressure to push oxygen across the alveolar membrane and into
the red blood cell. One way the body compensates is to manufacture more red blood cells by increasing EPO
production. If you start an aerobic exercise program, your tissues will need more oxygen to cope, and the kidney will
respond with more EPO. If erythrocytes are lost due to severe or prolonged bleeding, or under produced due to
disease or severe malnutrition, the kidneys come to the rescue by producing more EPO. Renal failure (loss of EPO
production) is associated with anemia, which makes it difficult for the body to cope with increased oxygen demands
or to supply oxygen adequately even under normal conditions. Anemia diminishes performance and can be life
threatening.
Blood Pressure Regulation
Due to osmosis, water follows where Na+ leads. Much of the water the kidneys recover from the forming urine
follows the reabsorption of Na+. ADH stimulation of aquaporin channels allows for regulation of water recovery in
the collecting ducts. Normally, all of the glucose is recovered, but loss of glucose control (diabetes mellitus) may
result in an osmotic dieresis severe enough to produce severe dehydration and death. A loss of renal function means
a loss of effective vascular volume control, leading to hypotension (low blood pressure) or hypertension (high blood
pressure), which can lead to stroke, heart attack, and aneurysm formation.
The kidneys cooperate with the lungs, liver, and adrenal cortex through the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
(see Figure 25.14). The liver synthesizes and secretes the inactive precursor angiotensinogen. When the blood
pressure is low, the kidney synthesizes and releases renin. Renin converts angiotensinogen into angiotensin I, and
ACE produced in the lung converts angiotensin I into biologically active angiotensin II (Figure 25.23). The immediate
and short-term effect of angiotensin II is to raise blood pressure by causing widespread vasoconstriction.
angiotensin II also stimulates the adrenal cortex to release the steroid hormone aldosterone, which results in renal
reabsorption of Na+ and its associated osmotic recovery of water. The reabsorption of Na+ helps to raise and
maintain blood pressure over a longer term.
1144
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 25.23
The Enzyme Renin Converts the Pro-enzyme Angiotensin
Regulation of Osmolarity
Blood pressure and osmolarity are regulated in a similar fashion. Severe hypo-osmolarity can cause problems like
lysis (rupture) of blood cells or widespread edema, which is due to a solute imbalance. Inadequate solute
concentration (such as protein) in the plasma results in water moving toward an area of greater solute
concentration, in this case, the interstitial space and cell cytoplasm. If the kidney glomeruli are damaged by an
autoimmune illness, large quantities of protein may be lost in the urine. The resultant drop in serum osmolarity
leads to widespread edema that, if severe, may lead to damaging or fatal brain swelling. Severe hypertonic
conditions may arise with severe dehydration from lack of water intake, severe vomiting, or uncontrolled diarrhea.
When the kidney is unable to recover sufficient water from the forming urine, the consequences may be severe
(lethargy, confusion, muscle cramps, and finally, death) .
Recovery of Electrolytes
Sodium, calcium, and potassium must be closely regulated. The role of Na+ and Ca++ homeostasis has been
discussed at length. Failure of K+ regulation can have serious consequences on nerve conduction, skeletal muscle
function, and most significantly, on cardiac muscle contraction and rhythm.
pH Regulation
Recall that enzymes lose their three-dimensional conformation and, therefore, their function if the pH is too acidic
or basic. This loss of conformation may be a consequence of the breaking of hydrogen bonds. Move the pH away
from the optimum for a specific enzyme and you may severely hamper its function throughout the body, including
hormone binding, central nervous system signaling, or myocardial contraction. Proper kidney function is essential
for pH homeostasis.
Everyday Connection
Stem Cells and Repair of Kidney Damage
Stem cells are unspecialized cells that can reproduce themselves via cell division, sometimes after years of
inactivity. Under certain conditions, they may differentiate into tissue-specific or organ-specific cells with special
functions. In some cases, stem cells may continually divide to produce a mature cell and to replace themselves.
Stem cell therapy has an enormous potential to improve the quality of life or save the lives of people suffering
from debilitating or life-threatening diseases. There have been several studies in animals, but since stem cell
therapy is still in its infancy, there have been limited experiments in humans.
25.10 • The Urinary System and Homeostasis
1145
Acute kidney injury can be caused by a number of factors, including transplants and other surgeries. It affects
7–10 percent of all hospitalized patients, resulting in the deaths of 35–40 percent of inpatients. In limited
studies using mesenchymal stem cells, there have been fewer instances of kidney damage after surgery, the
length of hospital stays has been reduced, and there have been fewer readmissions after release.
How do these stem cells work to protect or repair the kidney? Scientists are unsure at this point, but some
evidence has shown that these stem cells release several growth factors in endocrine and paracrine ways. As
further studies are conducted to assess the safety and effectiveness of stem cell therapy, we will move closer to
a day when kidney injury is rare, and curative treatments are routine.
1146
25 • The Urinary System
Access for free at openstax.org
Key Terms
anatomical sphincter
smooth or skeletal muscle
surrounding the lumen of a vessel or hollow organ
that can restrict flow when contracted
angiotensin I
protein produced by the enzymatic
action of renin on angiotensinogen; inactive
precursor of angiotensin II
angiotensin II
protein produced by the enzymatic
action of ACE on inactive angiotensin I; actively
causes vasoconstriction and stimulates aldosterone
release by the adrenal cortex
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
enzyme
produced by the lungs that catalyzes the reaction of
inactive angiotensin I into active angiotensin II
angiotensinogen
inactive protein in the circulation
produced by the liver; precursor of angiotensin I;
must be modified by the enzymes renin and ACE to
be activated
anuria
absence of urine produced; production of 50
mL or less per day
aquaporin
protein-forming water channels through
the lipid bilayer of the cell; allows water to cross;
activation in the collecting ducts is under the control
of ADH
Bowman’s capsule
cup-shaped sack lined by a
simple squamous epithelium (parietal surface) and
specialized cells called podocytes (visceral surface)
that participate in the filtration process; receives the
filtrate which then passes on to the PCTs
brush border
formed by microvilli on the surface of
certain cuboidal cells; in the kidney it is found in the
PCT; increases surface area for absorption in the
kidney
calyces
cup-like structures receiving urine from the
collecting ducts where it passes on to the renal
pelvis and ureter
cortical nephrons
nephrons with loops of Henle that
do not extend into the renal medulla
countercurrent multiplier system
involves the
descending and ascending loops of Henle directing
forming urine in opposing directions to create a
concentration gradient when combined with
variable permeability and sodium pumping
detrusor muscle
smooth muscle in the bladder wall;
fibers run in all directions to reduce the size of the
organ when emptying it of urine
distal convoluted tubules
portions of the nephron
distal to the loop of Henle that receive hyposmotic
filtrate from the loop of Henle and empty into
collecting ducts
diuretic
compound that increases urine output,
leading to decreased water conservation
efferent arteriole
arteriole carrying blood from the
glomerulus to the capillary beds around the
convoluted tubules and loop of Henle; portion of the
portal system
endothelins
group of vasoconstrictive, 21-amino acid
peptides; produced by endothelial cells of the renal
blood vessels, mesangial cells, and cells of the DCT
external urinary sphincter
skeletal muscle; must be
relaxed consciously to void urine
fenestrations
small windows through a cell, allowing
rapid filtration based on size; formed in such a way
as to allow substances to cross through a cell
without mixing with cell contents
filtration slits
formed by pedicels of podocytes;
substances filter between the pedicels based on
size
forming urine
filtrate undergoing modifications
through secretion and reabsorption before true
urine is produced
glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
rate of renal
filtration
glomerulus
tuft of capillaries surrounded by
Bowman’s capsule; filters the blood based on size
glycosuria
presence of glucose in the urine; caused
by high blood glucose levels that exceed the ability
of the kidneys to reabsorb the glucose; usually the
result of untreated or poorly controlled diabetes
mellitus
incontinence
loss of ability to control micturition
intercalated cell
specialized cell of the collecting
ducts that secrete or absorb acid or bicarbonate;
important in acid–base balance
internal urinary sphincter
smooth muscle at the
juncture of the bladder and urethra; relaxes as the
bladder fills to allow urine into the urethra
inulin
plant polysaccharide injected to determine
GFR; is neither secreted nor absorbed by the kidney,
so its appearance in the urine is directly
proportional to its filtration rate
juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA)
located at the
juncture of the DCT and the afferent and efferent
arterioles of the glomerulus; plays a role in the
regulation of renal blood flow and GFR
juxtaglomerular cell
modified smooth muscle cells
of the afferent arteriole; secretes renin in response
to a drop in blood pressure
juxtamedullary nephrons
nephrons adjacent to the
border of the cortex and medulla with loops of
Henle that extend into the renal medulla
leaky tight junctions
tight junctions in which the
sealing strands of proteins between the membranes
of adjacent cells are fewer in number and
incomplete; allows limited intercellular movement
25 • Key Terms
1147
of solvent and solutes
leukocyte esterase
enzyme produced by leukocytes
that can be detected in the urine and that serves as
an indirect indicator of urinary tract infection
loop of Henle
descending and ascending portions
between the proximal and distal convoluted
tubules; those of cortical nephrons do not extend
into the medulla, whereas those of juxtamedullary
nephrons do extend into the medulla
macula densa
cells found in the part of the DCT
forming the JGA; sense Na+ concentration in the
forming urine
medulla
inner region of kidney containing the renal
pyramids
mesangial
contractile cells found in the glomerulus;
can contract or relax to regulate filtration rate
micturition
also called urination or voiding
myogenic mechanism
mechanism by which smooth
muscle responds to stretch by contracting; an
increase in blood pressure causes vasoconstriction
and a decrease in blood pressure causes
vasodilation so that blood flow downstream remains
steady
nephrons
functional units of the kidney that carry out
all filtration and modification to produce urine;
consist of renal corpuscles, proximal and distal
convoluted tubules, and descending and ascending
loops of Henle; drain into collecting ducts
net filtration pressure (NFP)
pressure of fluid across
the glomerulus; calculated by taking the hydrostatic
pressure of the capillary and subtracting the colloid
osmotic pressure of the blood and the hydrostatic
pressure of Bowman’s capsule
oliguria
below normal urine production of 400–500
mL/day
osteomalacia
softening of bones due to a lack of
mineralization with calcium and phosphate; most
often due to lack of vitamin D; in children,
osteomalacia is termed rickets; not to be confused
with osteoporosis
pedicels
finger-like projections of podocytes
surrounding glomerular capillaries; interdigitate to
form a filtration membrane
peritubular capillaries
second capillary bed of the
renal portal system; surround the proximal and
distal convoluted tubules; associated with the vasa
recta
physiological sphincter
sphincter consisting of
circular smooth muscle indistinguishable from
adjacent muscle but possessing differential
innervations, permitting its function as a sphincter;
structurally weak
podocytes
cells forming finger-like processes; form
the visceral layer of Bowman’s capsule; pedicels of
the podocytes interdigitate to form a filtration
membrane
polyuria
urine production in excess of 2.5 L/day; may
be caused by diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus,
or excessive use of diuretics
principal cell
found in collecting ducts and possess
channels for the recovery or loss of sodium and
potassium; under the control of aldosterone; also
have aquaporin channels under ADH control to
regulate recovery of water
proximal convoluted tubules (PCTs)
tortuous
tubules receiving filtrate from Bowman’s capsule;
most active part of the nephron in reabsorption and
secretion
renal columns
extensions of the renal cortex into the
renal medulla; separates the renal pyramids;
contains blood vessels and connective tissues
renal corpuscle
consists of the glomerulus and
Bowman’s capsule
renal cortex
outer part of kidney containing all of the
nephrons; some nephrons have loops of Henle
extending into the medulla
renal fat pad
adipose tissue between the renal fascia
and the renal capsule that provides protective
cushioning to the kidney
renal hilum
recessed medial area of the kidney
through which the renal artery, renal vein, ureters,
lymphatics, and nerves pass
renal papillae
medullary area of the renal pyramids
where collecting ducts empty urine into the minor
calyces
renal pyramids
six to eight cone-shaped tissues in
the medulla of the kidney containing collecting
ducts and the loops of Henle of juxtamedullary
nephrons
renin
enzyme produced by juxtaglomerular cells in
response to decreased blood pressure or
sympathetic nervous activity; catalyzes the
conversion of angiotensinogen into angiotensin I
retroperitoneal
behind the peritoneum; in the case of
the kidney and ureters, between the parietal
peritoneum and the abdominal wall
sacral micturition center
group of neurons in the
sacral region of the spinal cord that controls
urination; acts reflexively unless its action is
modified by higher brain centers to allow voluntary
urination
specific gravity
weight of a liquid compared to pure
water, which has a specific gravity of 1.0; any solute
added to water will increase its specific gravity
systemic edema
increased fluid retention in the
interstitial spaces and cells of the body; can be seen
1148
25 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
as swelling over large areas of the body, particularly
the lower extremities
trigone
area at the base of the bladder marked by the
two ureters in the posterior–lateral aspect and the
urethral orifice in the anterior aspect oriented like
points on a triangle
tubuloglomerular feedback
feedback mechanism
involving the JGA; macula densa cells monitor Na+
concentration in the terminal portion of the
ascending loop of Henle and act to cause
vasoconstriction or vasodilation of afferent and
efferent arterioles to alter GFR
urethra
transports urine from the bladder to the
outside environment
urinalysis
analysis of urine to diagnose disease
urochrome
heme-derived pigment that imparts the
typical yellow color of urine
vasa recta
branches of the efferent arterioles that
parallel the course of the loops of Henle and are
continuous with the peritubular capillaries; with the
glomerulus, form a portal system
Chapter Review
25.1 Physical Characteristics of Urine
The kidney glomerulus filters blood mainly based on
particle size to produce a filtrate lacking cells or large
proteins. Most of the ions and molecules in the filtrate
are needed by the body and must be reabsorbed
farther down the nephron tubules, resulting in the
formation of urine. Urine characteristics change
depending on water intake, exercise, environmental
temperature, and nutrient intake. Urinalysis analyzes
characteristics of the urine and is used to diagnose
diseases. A minimum of 400 to 500 mL urine must be
produced daily to rid the body of wastes. Excessive
quantities of urine may indicate diabetes insipidus or
diabetes mellitus. The pH range of urine is 4.5 to 8.0,
and is affected by diet. Osmolarity ranges from 50 to
1200 milliosmoles, and is a reflection of the amount of
water being recovered or lost by renal nephrons.
25.2 Gross Anatomy of Urine Transport
The urethra is the only urinary structure that differs
significantly between males and females. This is due to
the dual role of the male urethra in transporting both
urine and semen. The urethra arises from the trigone
area at the base of the bladder. Urination is controlled
by an involuntary internal sphincter of smooth muscle
and a voluntary external sphincter of skeletal muscle.
The shorter female urethra contributes to the higher
incidence of bladder infections in females. The male
urethra receives secretions from the prostate gland,
Cowper’s gland, and seminal vesicles as well as sperm.
The bladder is largely retroperitoneal and can hold up
to 500–600 mL urine. Micturition is the process of
voiding the urine and involves both involuntary and
voluntary actions. Voluntary control of micturition
requires a mature and intact sacral micturition center.
It also requires an intact spinal cord. Loss of control of
micturition is called incontinence and results in voiding
when the bladder contains about 250 mL urine. The
ureters are retroperitoneal and lead from the renal
pelvis of the kidney to the trigone area at the base of
the bladder. A thick muscular wall consisting of
longitudinal and circular smooth muscle helps move
urine toward the bladder by way of peristaltic
contractions.
25.3 Gross Anatomy of the Kidney
As noted previously, the structure of the kidney is
divided into two principle regions—the peripheral rim of
cortex and the central medulla. The two kidneys
receive about 25 percent of cardiac output. They are
protected in the retroperitoneal space by the renal fat
pad and overlying ribs and muscle. Ureters, blood
vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves enter and leave at
the renal hilum. The renal arteries arise directly from
the aorta, and the renal veins drain directly into the
inferior vena cava. Kidney function is derived from the
actions of about 1.3 million nephrons per kidney; these
are the “functional units.” A capillary bed, the
glomerulus, filters blood and the filtrate is captured by
Bowman’s capsule. A portal system is formed when the
blood flows through a second capillary bed
surrounding the proximal and distal convoluted tubules
and the loop of Henle. Most water and solutes are
recovered by this second capillary bed. This filtrate is
processed and finally gathered by collecting ducts that
drain into the minor calyces, which merge to form
major calyces; the filtrate then proceeds to the renal
pelvis and finally the ureters.
25.4 Microscopic Anatomy of the Kidney
The functional unit of the kidney, the nephron, consists
of the renal corpuscle, PCT, loop of Henle, and DCT.
Cortical nephrons have short loops of Henle, whereas
juxtamedullary nephrons have long loops of Henle
extending into the medulla. About 15 percent of
nephrons are juxtamedullary. The glomerulus is a
capillary bed that filters blood principally based on
particle size. The filtrate is captured by Bowman’s
capsule and directed to the PCT. A filtration membrane
is formed by the fused basement membranes of the
25 • Chapter Review
1149
podocytes and the capillary endothelial cells that they
embrace. Contractile mesangial cells further perform a
role in regulating the rate at which the blood is filtered.
Specialized cells in the JGA produce paracrine signals
to regulate blood flow and filtration rates of the
glomerulus. Other JGA cells produce the enzyme renin,
which plays a central role in blood pressure regulation.
The filtrate enters the PCT where absorption and
secretion of several substances occur. The descending
and ascending limbs of the loop of Henle consist of
thick and thin segments. Absorption and secretion
continue in the DCT but to a lesser extent than in the
PCT. Each collecting duct collects forming urine from
several nephrons and responds to the posterior
pituitary hormone ADH by inserting aquaporin water
channels into the cell membrane to fine tune water
recovery.
25.5 Physiology of Urine Formation
The entire volume of the blood is filtered through the
kidneys about 300 times per day, and 99 percent of the
water filtered is recovered. The GFR is influenced by
hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure.
Under normal circumstances, hydrostatic pressure is
significantly greater and filtration occurs. The
hydrostatic pressure of the glomerulus depends on
systemic blood pressure, autoregulatory mechanisms,
sympathetic nervous activity, and paracrine hormones.
The kidney can function normally under a wide range of
blood pressures due to the autoregulatory nature of
smooth muscle.
25.6 Tubular Reabsorption
The kidney regulates water recovery and blood
pressure by producing the enzyme renin. It is renin that
starts a series of reactions, leading to the production of
the vasoconstrictor angiotensin II and the salt-
retaining steroid aldosterone. Water recovery is also
powerfully and directly influenced by the hormone
ADH. Even so, it only influences the last 10 percent of
water available for recovery after filtration at the
glomerulus, because 90 percent of water is recovered
before reaching the collecting ducts. Depending on the
body’s fluid status at any given time, the collecting
ducts can recover none or almost all of the water
reaching them.
Mechanisms of solute recovery include active
transport, simple diffusion, and facilitated diffusion.
Most filtered substances are reabsorbed. Urea, NH3,
creatinine, and some drugs are filtered or secreted as
wastes. H+ and HCO3– are secreted or reabsorbed as
needed to maintain acid–base balance. Movement of
water from the glomerulus is primarily due to pressure,
whereas that of peritubular capillaries and vasa recta is
due to osmolarity and concentration gradients. The
PCT is the most metabolically active part of the
nephron and uses a wide array of protein
micromachines to maintain homeostasis—symporters,
antiporters, and ATPase active transporters—in
conjunction with diffusion, both simple and facilitated.
Almost 100 percent of glucose, amino acids, and
vitamins are recovered in the PCT. Bicarbonate (HCO3–)
is recovered using the same enzyme, carbonic
anhydrase (CA), found in erythrocytes. The recovery of
solutes creates an osmotic gradient to promote the
recovery of water. The descending loop of the
juxtaglomerular nephrons reaches an osmolarity of up
to 1200 mOsmol/kg, promoting the recovery of water.
The ascending loop is impervious to water but actively
recovers Na+, reducing filtrate osmolarity to 50–100
mOsmol/kg. The descending and ascending loop and
vasa recta form a countercurrent multiplier system to
increase Na+ concentration in the kidney medulla. The
collecting ducts actively pump urea into the medulla,
further contributing to the high osmotic environment.
The vasa recta recover the solute and water in the
medulla, returning them to the circulation. Nearly 90
percent of water is recovered before the forming urine
reaches the DCT, which will recover another 10
percent. Calcium recovery in the DCT is influenced by
PTH and active vitamin D. In the collecting ducts, ADH
stimulates aquaporin channel insertion to increase
water recovery and thereby regulate osmolarity of the
blood. Aldosterone stimulates Na+ recovery by the
collecting duct.
25.7 Regulation of Renal Blood Flow
The kidneys are innervated by sympathetic nerves of
the autonomic nervous system. Sympathetic nervous
activity decreases blood flow to the kidney, making
more blood available to other areas of the body during
times of stress. The arteriolar myogenic mechanism
maintains a steady blood flow by causing arteriolar
smooth muscle to contract when blood pressure
increases and causing it to relax when blood pressure
decreases. Tubuloglomerular feedback involves
paracrine signaling at the JGA to cause
vasoconstriction or vasodilation to maintain a steady
rate of blood flow.
25.8 Endocrine Regulation of Kidney
Function
Endocrine hormones act from a distance and paracrine
hormones act locally. The renal enzyme renin converts
angiotensinogen into angiotensin I. The lung enzyme,
ACE, converts angiotensin I into active angiotensin II.
1150
25 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
Angiotensin II is an active vasoconstrictor that
increases blood pressure. Angiotensin II also
stimulates aldosterone release from the adrenal
cortex, causing the collecting duct to retain Na+, which
promotes water retention and a longer-term rise in
blood pressure. ADH promotes water recovery by the
collecting ducts by stimulating the insertion of
aquaporin water channels into cell membranes.
Endothelins are elevated in cases of diabetic kidney
disease, increasing Na+ retention and decreasing GFR.
Natriuretic hormones, released primarily from the atria
of the heart in response to stretching of the atrial walls,
stimulate Na+ excretion and thereby decrease blood
pressure. PTH stimulates the final step in the formation
of active vitamin D3 and reduces phosphate
reabsorption, resulting in higher circulating Ca++ levels.
25.9 Regulation of Fluid Volume and
Composition
The major hormones regulating body fluids are ADH,
aldosterone and ANH. Progesterone is similar in
structure to aldosterone and can bind to and weakly
stimulate aldosterone receptors, providing a similar but
diminished response. Blood pressure is a reflection of
blood volume and is monitored by baroreceptors in the
aortic arch and carotid sinuses. When blood pressure
increases, more action potentials are sent to the
central nervous system, resulting in greater
vasodilation, greater GFR, and more water lost in the
urine. ANH is released by the cardiomyocytes when
blood pressure increases, causing Na+ and water loss.
ADH at high levels causes vasoconstriction in addition
to its action on the collecting ducts to recover more
water. Diuretics increase urine volume. Mechanisms for
controlling Na+ concentration in the blood include the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and ADH. When
Na+ is retained, K+ is excreted; when Na+ is lost, K+ is
retained. When circulating Ca++ decreases, PTH
stimulates the reabsorption of Ca++ and inhibits
reabsorption of
. pH is regulated through
buffers, expiration of CO2, and excretion of acid or base
by the kidneys. The breakdown of amino acids
produces ammonia. Most ammonia is converted into
less-toxic urea in the liver and excreted in the urine.
Regulation of drugs is by glomerular filtration, tubular
secretion, and tubular reabsorption.
25.10 The Urinary System and Homeostasis
The effects of failure of parts of the urinary system may
range from inconvenient (incontinence) to fatal (loss of
filtration and many others). The kidneys catalyze the
final reaction in the synthesis of active vitamin D that in
turn helps regulate Ca++. The kidney hormone EPO
stimulates erythrocyte development and promotes
adequate O2 transport. The kidneys help regulate
blood pressure through Na+ and water retention and
loss. The kidneys work with the adrenal cortex, lungs,
and liver in the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
to regulate blood pressure. They regulate osmolarity of
the blood by regulating both solutes and water. Three
electrolytes are more closely regulated than others:
Na+, Ca++, and K+. The kidneys share pH regulation
with the lungs and plasma buffers, so that proteins can
preserve their three-dimensional conformation and
thus their function.
Review Questions
1. Diabetes insipidus or diabetes mellitus would most
likely be indicated by ________.
a.
anuria
b.
polyuria
c.
oliguria
d.
none of the above
2. The color of urine is determined mainly by
________.
a.
diet
b.
filtration rate
c.
byproducts of red blood cell breakdown
d.
filtration efficiency
3. Production of less than 50 mL/day of urine is called
________.
a.
normal
b.
polyuria
c.
oliguria
d.
anuria
4. Peristaltic contractions occur in the ________.
a.
urethra
b.
bladder
c.
ureters
d.
urethra, bladder, and ureters
5. Somatic motor neurons must be ________ to relax
the external urethral sphincter to allow urination.
a.
stimulated
b.
inhibited
25 • Review Questions
1151
6. Which part of the urinary system is not completely
retroperitoneal?
a.
kidneys
b.
ureters
c.
bladder
d.
nephrons
7. The renal pyramids are separated from each other
by extensions of the renal cortex called ________.
a.
renal medulla
b.
minor calyces
c.
medullary cortices
d.
renal columns
8. The primary structure found within the medulla is
the ________.
a.
loop of Henle
b.
minor calyces
c.
portal system
d.
ureter
9. The right kidney is slightly lower because
________.
a.
it is displaced by the liver
b.
it is displace by the heart
c.
it is slightly smaller
d.
it needs protection of the lower ribs
10. Blood filtrate is captured in the lumen of the
________.
a.
glomerulus
b.
Bowman’s capsule
c.
calyces
d.
renal papillae
11. What are the names of the capillaries following the
efferent arteriole?
a.
arcuate and medullary
b.
interlobar and interlobular
c.
peritubular and vasa recta
d.
peritubular and medullary
12. The functional unit of the kidney is called
________.
a.
the renal hilus
b.
the renal corpuscle
c.
the nephron
d.
Bowman’s capsule
13. ________ pressure must be greater on the
capillary side of the filtration membrane to
achieve filtration.
a.
Osmotic
b.
Hydrostatic
14. Production of urine to modify plasma makeup is
the result of ________.
a.
filtration
b.
absorption
c.
secretion
d.
filtration, absorption, and secretion
15. Systemic blood pressure must stay above 60 so
that the proper amount of filtration occurs.
a.
true
b.
false
16. Aquaporin channels are only found in the
collecting duct.
a.
true
b.
false
17. Most absorption and secretion occurs in this part
of the nephron.
a.
proximal convoluted tubule
b.
descending loop of Henle
c.
ascending loop of Henle
d.
distal convoluted tubule
e.
collecting ducts
18. The fine tuning of water recovery or disposal
occurs in ________.
a.
the proximal convoluted tubule
b.
the collecting ducts
c.
the ascending loop of Henle
d.
the distal convoluted tubule
19. Vasodilation of blood vessels to the kidneys is due
to ________.
a.
more frequent action potentials
b.
less frequent action potentials
20. When blood pressure increases, blood vessels
supplying the kidney will ________ to mount a
steady rate of filtration.
a.
contract
b.
relax
21. Which of these three paracrine chemicals cause
vasodilation?
a.
ATP
b.
adenosine
c.
nitric oxide
22. What hormone directly opposes the actions of
natriuretic hormones?
a.
renin
b.
nitric oxide
c.
dopamine
d.
aldosterone
1152
25 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
23. Which of these is a vasoconstrictor?
a.
nitric oxide
b.
natriuretic hormone
c.
bradykinin
d.
angiotensin II
24. What signal causes the heart to secrete atrial
natriuretic hormone?
a.
increased blood pressure
b.
decreased blood pressure
c.
increased Na+ levels
d.
decreased Na+ levels
25. Which of these beverages does not have a diuretic
effect?
a.
tea
b.
coffee
c.
alcohol
d.
milk
26. Progesterone can bind to receptors for which
hormone that, when released, activates water
retention?
a.
aldosterone
b.
ADH
c.
PTH
d.
ANH
27. Renin is released in response to ________.
a.
increased blood pressure
b.
decreased blood pressure
c.
ACE
d.
diuretics
28. Which step in vitamin D production does the
kidney perform?
a.
converts cholecalciferol into calcidiol
b.
converts calcidiol into calcitriol
c.
stores vitamin D
d.
none of these
29. Which hormone does the kidney produce that
stimulates red blood cell production?
a.
thrombopoietin
b.
vitamin D
c.
EPO
d.
renin
30. If there were no aquaporin channels in the
collecting duct, ________.
a.
you would develop systemic edema
b.
you would retain excess Na+
c.
you would lose vitamins and electrolytes
d.
you would suffer severe dehydration
Critical Thinking Questions
31. What is suggested by the presence of white blood
cells found in the urine?
32. Both diabetes mellitus and diabetes insipidus
produce large urine volumes, but how would other
characteristics of the urine differ between the two
diseases?
33. Why are people with female reproductive systems
more likely to contract bladder infections than
people with male reproductive systems?
34. Describe how forceful urination is accomplished.
35. What anatomical structures provide protection to
the kidney?
36. How does the renal portal system differ from the
hypothalamo–hypophyseal and digestive portal
systems?
37. Name the structures found in the renal hilum.
38. Which structures make up the renal corpuscle?
39. What are the major structures comprising the
filtration membrane?
40. Give the formula for net filtration pressure.
41. Name at least five symptoms of kidney failure.
42. Which vessels and what part of the nephron are
involved in countercurrent multiplication?
43. Give the approximate osmolarity of fluid in the
proximal convoluted tubule, deepest part of the
loop of Henle, distal convoluted tubule, and the
collecting ducts.
44. Explain what happens to Na+ concentration in the
nephron when GFR increases.
45. If you want the kidney to excrete more Na+ in the
urine, what do you want the blood flow to do?
46. What organs produce which hormones or enzymes
in the renin–angiotensin system?
47. PTH affects absorption and reabsorption of what?
48. Why is ADH also called vasopressin?
49. How can glucose be a diuretic?
50. How does lack of protein in the blood cause
edema?
51. Which three electrolytes are most closely
regulated by the kidney?
25 • Critical Thinking Questions
1153
1154
25 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 26
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the body’s main fluid compartments
•
Define plasma osmolality and identify two ways in which plasma osmolality is maintained
•
Identify the six ions most important to the function of the body
•
Define buffer and discuss the role of buffers in the body
•
Explain why bicarbonate must be conserved rather than reabsorbed in the kidney
•
Identify the normal range of blood pH and name the conditions where one has a blood pH that is either too
high or too low
Homeostasis, or the maintenance of constant conditions in the body, is a fundamental property of
all living things. In the human body, the substances that participate in chemical reactions must remain within
narrows ranges of concentration. Too much or too little of a single substance can disrupt your bodily functions.
Because metabolism relies on reactions that are all interconnected, any disruption might affect multiple organs or
even organ systems. Water is the most ubiquitous substance in the chemical reactions of life. The interactions of
various aqueous solutions—solutions in which water is the solvent—are continuously monitored and adjusted by a
large suite of interconnected feedback systems in your body. Understanding the ways in which the body maintains
these critical balances is key to understanding good health.
26.1 Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the importance of water in the body
•
Contrast the composition of the intracellular fluid with that of the extracellular fluid
•
Explain the importance of protein channels in the movement of solutes
•
Identify the causes and symptoms of edema
Figure 26.1
Venus Williams Perspiring on the Tennis Court The body has critically important mechanisms for balancing the intake and
output of bodily fluids. An athlete must continuously replace the water and electrolytes lost in sweat. (credit: “Edwin Martinez1”/Wikimedia
Commons)
The chemical reactions of life take place in aqueous solutions. The dissolved substances in a solution are called
solutes. In the human body, solutes vary in different parts of the body, but may include proteins—including those
that transport lipids, carbohydrates, and, very importantly, electrolytes. Often in medicine, a mineral dissociated
from a salt that carries an electrical charge (an ion) is called an electrolyte. For instance, sodium ions (Na+) and
chloride ions (Cl-) are often referred to as electrolytes.
In the body, water moves through semi-permeable membranes of cells and from one compartment of the body to
another by a process called osmosis. Osmosis is basically the diffusion of water from regions of higher concentration
of water to regions of lower concentration of water, along an osmotic gradient across a semi-permeable membrane.
As a result, water will move into and out of cells and tissues, depending on the relative concentrations of the water
and solutes found there. An appropriate balance of solutes inside and outside of cells must be maintained to ensure
normal function.
Body Water Content
Human beings are mostly water, ranging from about 75 percent of body mass in infants to about 50–60 percent in
adults, to as low as 45 percent in old age. The percent of body water changes with development, because the
proportions of the body given over to each organ and to muscles, fat, bone, and other tissues change from infancy to
adulthood (Figure 26.2). Your brain and kidneys have the highest proportions of water, which composes 80–85
percent of their masses. In contrast, teeth have the lowest proportion of water, at 8–10 percent.
1156
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 26.2
Water Content of the Body’s Organs and Tissues
Water content varies in different body organs and tissues, from as
little as 8 percent in the teeth to as much as 85 percent in the brain.
Fluid Compartments
Body fluids can be discussed in terms of their specific fluid compartment, a location that is largely separate from
another compartment by some form of a physical barrier. The intracellular fluid (ICF) compartment is the system
that includes all fluid enclosed in cells by their plasma membranes. Extracellular fluid (ECF) surrounds all cells in
the body. Extracellular fluid has two primary constituents: the fluid component of the blood (called plasma) and the
interstitial fluid (IF) that surrounds all cells not in the blood (Figure 26.3).
26.1 • Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
1157
FIGURE 26.3
Fluid Compartments in the Human Body
The intracellular fluid (ICF) is the fluid within cells. The interstitial fluid (IF) is
part of the extracellular fluid (ECF) between the cells. Blood plasma is the second part of the ECF. Materials travel between cells and the
plasma in capillaries through the IF.
Intracellular Fluid
The ICF lies within cells and is the principal component of the cytosol/cytoplasm. The ICF makes up about 60
percent of the total water in the human body, and in an average-size adult male, the ICF accounts for about 25 liters
(seven gallons) of fluid (Figure 26.4). This fluid volume tends to be very stable, because the amount of water in living
cells is closely regulated. If the amount of water inside a cell falls to a value that is too low, the cytosol becomes too
concentrated with solutes to carry on normal cellular activities; if too much water enters a cell, the cell may burst
and be destroyed.
FIGURE 26.4
A Pie Graph Showing the Proportion of Total Body Fluid in Each of the Body’s Fluid Compartments
Most of the
water in the body is intracellular fluid. The second largest volume is the interstitial fluid, which surrounds cells that are not blood cells.
Extracellular Fluid
The ECF accounts for the other one-third of the body’s water content. Approximately 20 percent of the ECF is found
in plasma. Plasma travels through the body in blood vessels and transports a range of materials, including blood
cells, proteins (including clotting factors and antibodies), electrolytes, nutrients, gases, and wastes. Gases,
nutrients, and waste materials travel between capillaries and cells through the IF. Cells are separated from the IF by
a selectively permeable cell membrane that helps regulate the passage of materials between the IF and the interior
1158
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
of the cell.
The body has other water-based ECF. These include the cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the brain and spinal cord,
lymph, the synovial fluid in joints, the pleural fluid in the pleural cavities, the pericardial fluid in the cardiac sac, the
peritoneal fluid in the peritoneal cavity, and the aqueous humor of the eye. Because these fluids are outside of cells,
these fluids are also considered components of the ECF compartment.
Composition of Body Fluids
The compositions of the two components of the ECF—plasma and IF—are more similar to each other than either is to
the ICF (Figure 26.5). Blood plasma has high concentrations of sodium, chloride, bicarbonate, and protein. The IF
has high concentrations of sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate, but a relatively lower concentration of protein. In
contrast, the ICF has elevated amounts of potassium, phosphate, magnesium, and protein. Overall, the ICF contains
high concentrations of potassium and phosphate (
), whereas both plasma and the ECF contain high
concentrations of sodium and chloride.
FIGURE 26.5
The Concentrations of Different Elements in Key Bodily Fluids
The graph shows the composition of the ICF, IF, and
plasma. The compositions of plasma and IF are similar to one another but are quite different from the composition of the ICF.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/bodyfluids) to learn more about body fluids, fluid compartments, and
electrolytes. When blood volume decreases due to sweating, from what source is water taken in by the blood?
Most body fluids are neutral in charge. Thus, cations, or positively charged ions, and anions, or negatively charged
ions, are balanced in fluids. As seen in the previous graph, sodium (Na+) ions and chloride (Cl-) ions are
concentrated in the ECF of the body, whereas potassium (K+) ions are concentrated inside cells. Although sodium
and potassium can “leak” through “pores” into and out of cells, respectively, the high levels of potassium and low
levels of sodium in the ICF are maintained by sodium-potassium pumps in the cell membranes. These pumps use
the energy supplied by ATP to pump sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell (Figure 26.6).
26.1 • Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
1159
FIGURE 26.6
The Sodium-Potassium Pump
The sodium-potassium pump is powered by ATP to transfer sodium out of the cytoplasm
and into the ECF. The pump also transfers potassium out of the ECF and into the cytoplasm. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz
Villarreal)
Fluid Movement between Compartments
Hydrostatic pressure, the force exerted by a fluid against a wall, causes movement of fluid between compartments.
The hydrostatic pressure of blood is the pressure exerted by blood against the walls of the blood vessels by the
pumping action of the heart. In capillaries, hydrostatic pressure (also known as capillary blood pressure) is higher
than the opposing “colloid osmotic pressure” in blood—a “constant” pressure primarily produced by circulating
albumin—at the arteriolar end of the capillary (Figure 26.7). This pressure forces plasma and nutrients out of the
capillaries and into surrounding tissues. Fluid and the cellular wastes in the tissues enter the capillaries at the
venule end, where the hydrostatic pressure is less than the osmotic pressure in the vessel. Filtration pressure
squeezes fluid from the plasma in the blood to the IF surrounding the tissue cells. The surplus fluid in the interstitial
space that is not returned directly back to the capillaries is drained from tissues by the lymphatic system, and then
re-enters the vascular system at the subclavian veins.
FIGURE 26.7
Capillary Exchange
Net filtration occurs near the arterial end of the capillary since capillary hydrostatic pressure (CHP) is
greater than blood colloidal osmotic pressure (BCOP). There is no net movement of fluid near the midpoint of the capillary since CHP =
BCOP. Net reabsorption occurs near the venous end of the capillary since BCOP is greater than CHP.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/dynamicfluid) to see an explanation of the dynamics of fluid in the body’s
compartments. What happens in the tissue when capillary blood pressure is less than osmotic pressure?
Hydrostatic pressure is especially important in governing the movement of water in the nephrons of the kidneys to
ensure proper filtering of the blood to form urine. As hydrostatic pressure in the kidneys increases, the amount of
water leaving the capillaries also increases, and more urine filtrate is formed. If hydrostatic pressure in the kidneys
1160
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
drops too low, as can happen in dehydration, the functions of the kidneys will be impaired, and less nitrogenous
wastes will be removed from the bloodstream. Extreme dehydration can result in kidney failure.
Fluid also moves between compartments along an osmotic gradient. Recall that an osmotic gradient is produced by
the difference in concentration of all solutes on either side of a semi-permeable membrane. The magnitude of the
osmotic gradient is proportional to the difference in the concentration of solutes on one side of the cell membrane
to that on the other side. Water will move by osmosis from the side where its concentration is high (and the
concentration of solute is low) to the side of the membrane where its concentration is low (and the concentration of
solute is high). In the body, water moves by osmosis from plasma to the IF (and the reverse) and from the IF to the
ICF (and the reverse). In the body, water moves constantly into and out of fluid compartments as conditions change
in different parts of the body.
For example, if you are sweating, you will lose water through your skin. Sweating depletes your tissues of water and
increases the solute concentration in those tissues. As this happens, water diffuses from your blood into sweat
glands and surrounding skin tissues that have become dehydrated because of the osmotic gradient. Additionally, as
water leaves the blood, it is replaced by the water in other tissues throughout your body that are not dehydrated. If
this continues, dehydration spreads throughout the body. When a dehydrated person drinks water and rehydrates,
the water is redistributed by the same gradient, but in the opposite direction, replenishing water in all of the tissues.
Solute Movement between Compartments
The movement of some solutes between compartments is active, which consumes energy and is an active transport
process, whereas the movement of other solutes is passive, which does not require energy. Active transport allows
cells to move a specific substance against its concentration gradient through a membrane protein, requiring energy
in the form of ATP. For example, the sodium-potassium pump employs active transport to pump sodium out of cells
and potassium into cells, with both substances moving against their concentration gradients.
Passive transport of a molecule or ion depends on its ability to pass through the membrane, as well as the existence
of a concentration gradient that allows the molecules to diffuse from an area of higher concentration to an area of
lower concentration. Some molecules, like gases, lipids, and water itself (which also utilizes water channels in the
membrane called aquaporins), slip fairly easily through the cell membrane; others, including polar molecules like
glucose, amino acids, and ions do not. Some of these molecules enter and leave cells using facilitated transport,
whereby the molecules move down a concentration gradient through specific protein channels in the membrane.
This process does not require energy. For example, glucose is transferred into cells by glucose transporters that use
facilitated transport (Figure 26.8).
FIGURE 26.8
Facilitated Diffusion
Glucose molecules use facilitated diffusion to move down a concentration gradient through the
carrier protein channels in the membrane. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
26.1 • Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
1161
Disorders of the...
Fluid Balance: Edema
Edema is the accumulation of excess water in the tissues. It is most common in the soft tissues of the
extremities. The physiological causes of edema include water leakage from blood capillaries. Edema is almost
always caused by an underlying medical condition, by the use of certain therapeutic drugs, by pregnancy, by
localized injury, or by an allergic reaction. In the limbs, the symptoms of edema include swelling of the
subcutaneous tissues, an increase in the normal size of the limb, and stretched, tight skin. One quick way to
check for subcutaneous edema localized in a limb is to press a finger into the suspected area. Edema is likely if
the depression persists for several seconds after the finger is removed (which is called “pitting”).
Pulmonary edema is excess fluid in the air sacs of the lungs, a common symptom of heart and/or kidney failure.
People with pulmonary edema likely will experience difficulty breathing, and they may experience chest pain.
Pulmonary edema can be life threatening, because it compromises gas exchange in the lungs, and anyone
having symptoms should immediately seek medical care.
In pulmonary edema resulting from heart failure, excessive leakage of water occurs because fluids get “backed
up” in the pulmonary capillaries of the lungs, when the left ventricle of the heart is unable to pump sufficient
blood into the systemic circulation. Because the left side of the heart is unable to pump out its normal volume of
blood, the blood in the pulmonary circulation gets “backed up,” starting with the left atrium, then into the
pulmonary veins, and then into pulmonary capillaries. The resulting increased hydrostatic pressure within
pulmonary capillaries, as blood is still coming in from the pulmonary arteries, causes fluid to be pushed out of
them and into lung tissues.
Other causes of edema include damage to blood vessels and/or lymphatic vessels, or a decrease in osmotic
pressure in chronic and severe liver disease, where the liver is unable to manufacture plasma proteins (Figure
26.9). A decrease in the normal levels of plasma proteins results in a decrease of colloid osmotic pressure
(which counterbalances the hydrostatic pressure) in the capillaries. This process causes loss of water from the
blood to the surrounding tissues, resulting in edema.
FIGURE 26.9
Edema
An allergic reaction can cause capillaries in the hand to leak excess fluid that accumulates in the tissues.
(credit: Jane Whitney)
Mild, transient edema of the feet and legs may be caused by sitting or standing in the same position for long
periods of time, as in the work of a toll collector or a supermarket cashier. This is because deep veins in the
lower limbs rely on skeletal muscle contractions to push on the veins and thus “pump” blood back to the heart.
Otherwise, the venous blood pools in the lower limbs and can leak into surrounding tissues.
Medications that can result in edema include vasodilators, calcium channel blockers used to treat hypertension,
1162
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
26.2 Water Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how water levels in the body influence the thirst cycle
•
Identify the main route by which water leaves the body
•
Describe the role of ADH and its effect on body water levels
•
Define dehydration and identify common causes of dehydration
On a typical day, the average adult will take in about 2500 mL (almost 3 quarts) of aqueous fluids. Although most of
the intake comes through the digestive tract, about 230 mL (8 ounces) per day is generated metabolically, in the last
steps of aerobic respiration. Additionally, each day about the same volume (2500 mL) of water leaves the body by
different routes; most of this lost water is removed as urine. The kidneys also can adjust blood volume though
mechanisms that draw water out of the filtrate and urine. The kidneys can regulate water levels in the body; they
conserve water if you are dehydrated, and they can make urine more dilute to expel excess water if necessary.
Water is lost through the skin through evaporation from the skin surface without overt sweating and from air
expelled from the lungs. This type of water loss is called insensible water loss because a person is usually unaware
of it.
Regulation of Water Intake
Osmolality is the ratio of solutes in a solution to a volume of solvent in a solution. Plasma osmolality is thus the
ratio of solutes to water in blood plasma. A person’s plasma osmolality value reflects the state of hydration. A
healthy body maintains plasma osmolality within a narrow range, by employing several mechanisms that regulate
both water intake and output.
Drinking water is considered voluntary. So how is water intake regulated by the body? Consider someone who is
experiencing dehydration, a net loss of water that results in insufficient water in blood and other tissues. The water
that leaves the body, as exhaled air, sweat, or urine, is ultimately extracted from blood plasma. As the blood
becomes more concentrated, the thirst response—a sequence of physiological processes—is triggered (Figure
26.10). Osmoreceptors are sensory receptors in the thirst center in the hypothalamus that monitor the
concentration of solutes (osmolality) of the blood. If blood osmolality increases above its ideal value, the
hypothalamus transmits signals that result in a conscious awareness of thirst. The person should (and normally
does) respond by drinking water. The hypothalamus of a dehydrated person also releases antidiuretic hormone
(ADH) through the posterior pituitary gland. ADH signals the kidneys to recover water from urine, effectively diluting
the blood plasma. To conserve water, the hypothalamus of a dehydrated person also sends signals via the
sympathetic nervous system to the salivary glands in the mouth. The signals result in a decrease in watery, serous
output (and an increase in stickier, thicker mucus output). These changes in secretions result in a “dry mouth” and
the sensation of thirst.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, estrogen therapies, and some diabetes medications. Underlying medical
conditions that can contribute to edema include congestive heart failure, kidney damage and kidney disease,
disorders that affect the veins of the legs, and cirrhosis and other liver disorders.
Therapy for edema usually focuses on elimination of the cause. Activities that can reduce the effects of the
condition include appropriate exercises to keep the blood and lymph flowing through the affected areas. Other
therapies include elevation of the affected part to assist drainage, massage and compression of the areas to
move the fluid out of the tissues, and decreased salt intake to decrease sodium and water retention.
26.2 • Water Balance
1163
FIGURE 26.10
A Flowchart Showing the Thirst Response
The thirst response begins when osmoreceptors detect a decrease in water
levels in the blood.
Decreased blood volume resulting from water loss has two additional effects. First, baroreceptors, blood-pressure
receptors in the arch of the aorta and the carotid arteries in the neck, detect a decrease in blood pressure that
results from decreased blood volume. The heart is ultimately signaled to increase its rate and/or strength of
contractions to compensate for the lowered blood pressure.
Second, the kidneys have a renin-angiotensin hormonal system that increases the production of the active form of
the hormone angiotensin II, which helps stimulate thirst, but also stimulates the release of the hormone
aldosterone from the adrenal glands. Aldosterone increases the reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubules of the
nephrons in the kidneys, and water follows this reabsorbed sodium back into the blood.
If adequate fluids are not consumed, dehydration results and a person’s body contains too little water to function
correctly. A person who repeatedly vomits or who has diarrhea may become dehydrated, and infants, because their
body mass is so low, can become dangerously dehydrated very quickly. Endurance athletes such as distance
runners often become dehydrated during long races. Dehydration can be a medical emergency, and a dehydrated
person may lose consciousness, become comatose, or die, if their body is not rehydrated quickly.
1164
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
Regulation of Water Output
Water loss from the body occurs predominantly through the renal system. A person produces an average of 1.5 liters
(1.6 quarts) of urine per day. Although the volume of urine varies in response to hydration levels, there is a minimum
volume of urine production required for proper bodily functions. The kidney excretes 100 to 1200 milliosmoles of
solutes per day to rid the body of a variety of excess salts and other water-soluble chemical wastes, most notably
creatinine, urea, and uric acid. Failure to produce the minimum volume of urine means that metabolic wastes cannot
be effectively removed from the body, a situation that can impair organ function. The minimum level of urine
production necessary to maintain normal function is about 0.47 liters (0.5 quarts) per day.
The kidneys also must make adjustments in the event of ingestion of too much fluid. Diuresis, which is the
production of urine in excess of normal levels, begins about 30 minutes after drinking a large quantity of fluid.
Diuresis reaches a peak after about 1 hour, and normal urine production is reestablished after about 3 hours.
Role of ADH
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as vasopressin, controls the amount of water reabsorbed from the
collecting ducts and tubules in the kidney. This hormone is produced in the hypothalamus and is delivered to the
posterior pituitary for storage and release (Figure 26.11). When the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus detect an
increase in the concentration of blood plasma, the hypothalamus signals the release of ADH from the posterior
pituitary into the blood.
FIGURE 26.11
Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
ADH is produced in the hypothalamus and released by the posterior pituitary gland. It
causes the kidneys to retain water, constricts arterioles in the peripheral circulation, and affects some social behaviors in mammals.
ADH has two major effects. It constricts the arterioles in the peripheral circulation, which reduces the flow of blood
to the extremities and thereby increases the blood supply to the core of the body. ADH also causes the epithelial
cells that line the renal collecting tubules to move water channel proteins, called aquaporins, from the interior of the
cells to the apical surface, where these proteins are inserted into the cell membrane (Figure 26.12). The result is an
increase in the water permeability of these cells and, thus, a large increase in water passage from the urine through
the walls of the collecting tubules, leading to more reabsorption of water into the bloodstream. When the blood
plasma becomes less concentrated and the level of ADH decreases, aquaporins are removed from collecting tubule
cell membranes, and the passage of water out of urine and into the blood decreases.
26.2 • Water Balance
1165
FIGURE 26.12
Aquaporins
The binding of ADH to receptors on the cells of the collecting tubule results in aquaporins being inserted
into the plasma membrane, shown in the lower cell. This dramatically increases the flow of water out of the tubule and into the
bloodstream.
A diuretic is a compound that increases urine output and therefore decreases water conservation by the body.
Diuretics are used to treat hypertension, congestive heart failure, and fluid retention associated with menstruation.
Alcohol acts as a diuretic by inhibiting the release of ADH. Additionally, caffeine, when consumed in high
concentrations, acts as a diuretic.
26.3 Electrolyte Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
List the role of the six most important electrolytes in the body
•
Name the disorders associated with abnormally high and low levels of the six electrolytes
•
Identify the predominant extracellular anion
•
Describe the role of aldosterone on the level of water in the body
The body contains a large variety of ions, or electrolytes, which perform a variety of functions. Some ions assist in
the transmission of electrical impulses along cell membranes in neurons and muscles. Other ions help to stabilize
protein structures in enzymes. Still others aid in releasing hormones from endocrine glands. All of the ions in plasma
contribute to the osmotic balance that controls the movement of water between cells and their environment.
Electrolytes in living systems include sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, calcium, phosphate, magnesium,
copper, zinc, iron, manganese, molybdenum, copper, and chromium. In terms of body functioning, six electrolytes
are most important: sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, calcium, and phosphate.
Roles of Electrolytes
These six ions aid in nerve excitability, endocrine secretion, membrane permeability, buffering body fluids, and
controlling the movement of fluids between compartments. These ions enter the body through the digestive tract.
More than 90 percent of the calcium and phosphate that enters the body is incorporated into bones and teeth, with
bone serving as a mineral reserve for these ions. In the event that calcium and phosphate are needed for other
functions, bone tissue can be broken down to supply the blood and other tissues with these minerals. Phosphate is
a normal constituent of nucleic acids; hence, blood levels of phosphate will increase whenever nucleic acids are
broken down.
1166
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
Excretion of ions occurs mainly through the kidneys, with lesser amounts lost in sweat and in feces. Excessive
sweating may cause a significant loss, especially of sodium and chloride. Severe vomiting or diarrhea will cause a
loss of chloride and bicarbonate ions. Adjustments in respiratory and renal functions allow the body to regulate the
levels of these ions in the ECF.
Table 26.1 lists the reference values for blood plasma, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine for the six ions addressed
in this section. In a clinical setting, sodium, potassium, and chloride are typically analyzed in a routine urine sample.
In contrast, calcium and phosphate analysis requires a collection of urine across a 24-hour period, because the
output of these ions can vary considerably over the course of a day. Urine values reflect the rates of excretion of
these ions. Bicarbonate is the one ion that is not normally excreted in urine; instead, it is conserved by the kidneys
for use in the body’s buffering systems.
Electrolyte and Ion Reference Values
Name
Chemical symbol
Plasma
CSF
Urine
Sodium
Na+
136.00–146.00 (mM)
138.00–150.00 (mM)
40.00–220.00 (mM)
Potassium
K+
3.50–5.00 (mM)
0.35–3.5 (mM)
25.00–125.00 (mM)
Chloride
Cl-
98.00–107.00 (mM)
118.00–132.00 (mM)
110.00–250.00 (mM)
Bicarbonate
HCO3-
22.00–29.00 (mM)
------
------
Calcium
Ca++
2.15–2.55 (mmol/day)
------
Up to 7.49 (mmol/day)
Phosphate
0.81–1.45 (mmol/day)
------
12.90–42.00 (mmol/day)
TABLE 26.1
Sodium
Sodium is the major cation of the extracellular fluid. It is responsible for one-half of the osmotic pressure gradient
that exists between the interior of cells and their surrounding environment. People eating a typical Western diet,
which is very high in NaCl, routinely take in 130 to 160 mmol/day of sodium, but humans require only 1 to 2 mmol/
day. This excess sodium appears to be a major factor in hypertension (high blood pressure) in some people.
Excretion of sodium is accomplished primarily by the kidneys. Sodium is freely filtered through the glomerular
capillaries of the kidneys, and although much of the filtered sodium is reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule,
some remains in the filtrate and urine, and is normally excreted.
Hyponatremia is a lower-than-normal concentration of sodium, usually associated with excess water accumulation
in the body, which dilutes the sodium. An absolute loss of sodium may be due to a decreased intake of the ion
coupled with its continual excretion in the urine. An abnormal loss of sodium from the body can result from several
conditions, including excessive sweating, vomiting, or diarrhea; the use of diuretics; excessive production of urine,
which can occur in diabetes; and acidosis, either metabolic acidosis or diabetic ketoacidosis.
A relative decrease in blood sodium can occur because of an imbalance of sodium in one of the body’s other fluid
compartments, like IF, or from a dilution of sodium due to water retention related to edema or congestive heart
failure. At the cellular level, hyponatremia results in increased entry of water into cells by osmosis, because the
concentration of solutes within the cell exceeds the concentration of solutes in the now-diluted ECF. The excess
water causes swelling of the cells; the swelling of red blood cells—decreasing their oxygen-carrying efficiency and
making them potentially too large to fit through capillaries—along with the swelling of neurons in the brain can result
in brain damage or even death.
Hypernatremia is an abnormal increase of blood sodium. It can result from water loss from the blood, resulting in
the hemoconcentration of all blood constituents. Hormonal imbalances involving ADH and aldosterone may also
26.3 • Electrolyte Balance
1167
result in higher-than-normal sodium values.
Potassium
Potassium is the major intracellular cation. It helps establish the resting membrane potential in neurons and muscle
fibers after membrane depolarization and action potentials. In contrast to sodium, potassium has very little effect
on osmotic pressure. The low levels of potassium in blood and CSF are due to the sodium-potassium pumps in cell
membranes, which maintain the normal potassium concentration gradients between the ICF and ECF. The
recommendation for daily intake/consumption of potassium is 4700 mg. Potassium is excreted, both actively and
passively, through the renal tubules, especially the distal convoluted tubule and collecting ducts. Potassium
participates in the exchange with sodium in the renal tubules under the influence of aldosterone, which also relies
on basolateral sodium-potassium pumps.
Hypokalemia is an abnormally low potassium blood level. Similar to the situation with hyponatremia, hypokalemia
can occur because of either an absolute reduction of potassium in the body or a relative reduction of potassium in
the blood due to the redistribution of potassium. An absolute loss of potassium can arise from decreased intake,
frequently related to starvation. It can also come about from vomiting, diarrhea, or alkalosis.
Some insulin-dependent diabetic patients experience a relative reduction of potassium in the blood from the
redistribution of potassium. When insulin is administered and glucose is taken up by cells, potassium passes
through the cell membrane along with glucose, decreasing the amount of potassium in the blood and IF, which can
cause hyperpolarization of the cell membranes of neurons, reducing their responses to stimuli.
Hyperkalemia, an elevated potassium blood level, also can impair the function of skeletal muscles, the nervous
system, and the heart. Hyperkalemia can result from increased dietary intake of potassium. In such a situation,
potassium from the blood ends up in the ECF in abnormally high concentrations. This can result in a partial
depolarization (excitation) of the plasma membrane of skeletal muscle fibers, neurons, and cardiac cells of the
heart, and can also lead to an inability of cells to repolarize. For the heart, this means that it won’t relax after a
contraction, and will effectively “seize” and stop pumping blood, which is fatal within minutes. Because of such
effects on the nervous system, a person with hyperkalemia may also exhibit mental confusion, numbness, and
weakened respiratory muscles.
Chloride
Chloride is the predominant extracellular anion. Chloride is a major contributor to the osmotic pressure gradient
between the ICF and ECF, and plays an important role in maintaining proper hydration. Chloride functions to balance
cations in the ECF, maintaining the electrical neutrality of this fluid. The paths of secretion and reabsorption of
chloride ions in the renal system follow the paths of sodium ions.
Hypochloremia, or lower-than-normal blood chloride levels, can occur because of defective renal tubular
absorption. Vomiting, diarrhea, and metabolic acidosis can also lead to hypochloremia. Hyperchloremia, or higher-
than-normal blood chloride levels, can occur due to dehydration, excessive intake of dietary salt (NaCl) or
swallowing of sea water, aspirin intoxication, congestive heart failure, and the hereditary, chronic lung disease,
cystic fibrosis. In people who have cystic fibrosis, chloride levels in sweat are two to five times those of normal
levels, and analysis of sweat is often used in the diagnosis of the disease.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/saltwater) for an explanation of the effect of seawater on humans. What
effect does drinking seawater have on the body?
Bicarbonate
Bicarbonate is the second most abundant anion in the blood. Its principal function is to maintain your body’s acid-
base balance by being part of buffer systems. This role will be discussed in a different section.
Bicarbonate ions result from a chemical reaction that starts with carbon dioxide (CO2) and water, two molecules that
are produced at the end of aerobic metabolism. Only a small amount of CO2 can be dissolved in body fluids. Thus,
over 90 percent of the CO2 is converted into bicarbonate ions, HCO3–, through the following reactions:
1168
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
The bidirectional arrows indicate that the reactions can go in either direction, depending on the concentrations of
the reactants and products. Carbon dioxide is produced in large amounts in tissues that have a high metabolic rate.
Carbon dioxide is converted into bicarbonate in the cytoplasm of red blood cells through the action of an enzyme
called carbonic anhydrase. Bicarbonate is transported in the blood. Once in the lungs, the reactions reverse
direction, and CO2 is regenerated from bicarbonate to be exhaled as metabolic waste.
Calcium
About two pounds of calcium in your body are bound up in bone, which provides hardness to the bone and serves as
a mineral reserve for calcium and its salts for the rest of the tissues. Teeth also have a high concentration of calcium
within them. A little more than one-half of blood calcium is bound to proteins, leaving the rest in its ionized form.
Calcium ions, Ca2+, are necessary for muscle contraction, enzyme activity, and blood coagulation. In addition,
calcium helps to stabilize cell membranes and is essential for the release of neurotransmitters from neurons and of
hormones from endocrine glands.
Calcium is absorbed through the intestines under the influence of activated vitamin D. A deficiency of vitamin D
leads to a decrease in absorbed calcium and, eventually, a depletion of calcium stores from the skeletal system,
potentially leading to rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults, contributing to osteoporosis.
Hypocalcemia, or abnormally low calcium blood levels, is seen in hypoparathyroidism, which may follow the
removal of the thyroid gland, because the four nodules of the parathyroid gland are embedded in it. Hypercalcemia,
or abnormally high calcium blood levels, is seen in primary hyperparathyroidism. Some malignancies may also result
in hypercalcemia.
Phosphate
Phosphate is present in the body in three ionic forms:
,
, and
. The most common form is
. Bone and teeth bind up 85 percent of the body’s phosphate as part of calcium-phosphate salts. Phosphate
is found in phospholipids, such as those that make up the cell membrane, and in ATP, nucleotides, and buffers.
Hypophosphatemia, or abnormally low phosphate blood levels, occurs with heavy use of antacids, during alcohol
withdrawal, and during malnourishment. In the face of phosphate depletion, the kidneys usually conserve
phosphate, but during starvation, this conservation is impaired greatly. Hyperphosphatemia, or abnormally
increased levels of phosphates in the blood, occurs if there is decreased renal function or in cases of acute
lymphocytic leukemia. Additionally, because phosphate is a major constituent of the ICF, any significant destruction
of cells can result in dumping of phosphate into the ECF.
Regulation of Sodium and Potassium
Sodium is reabsorbed from the renal filtrate, and potassium is excreted into the filtrate in the renal collecting tubule.
The control of this exchange is governed principally by two hormones—aldosterone and angiotensin II.
Aldosterone
Recall that aldosterone increases the excretion of potassium and the reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubule.
Aldosterone is released if blood levels of potassium increase, if blood levels of sodium severely decrease, or if blood
pressure decreases. Its net effect is to conserve and increase water levels in the plasma by reducing the excretion
of sodium, and thus water, from the kidneys. In a negative feedback loop, increased osmolality of the ECF (which
follows aldosterone-stimulated sodium absorption) inhibits the release of the hormone (Figure 26.13).
26.3 • Electrolyte Balance
1169
FIGURE 26.13
The Aldosterone Feedback Loop
Aldosterone, which is released by the adrenal gland, facilitates reabsorption of Na+
and thus the reabsorption of water.
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin II causes vasoconstriction and an increase in systemic blood pressure. This action increases the
glomerular filtration rate, resulting in more material filtered out of the glomerular capillaries and into Bowman’s
capsule. Angiotensin II also signals an increase in the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex.
In the distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidneys, aldosterone stimulates the synthesis and
activation of the sodium-potassium pump (Figure 26.14). Sodium passes from the filtrate, into and through the cells
of the tubules and ducts, into the ECF and then into capillaries. Water follows the sodium due to osmosis. Thus,
aldosterone causes an increase in blood sodium levels and blood volume. Aldosterone’s effect on potassium is the
reverse of that of sodium; under its influence, excess potassium is pumped into the renal filtrate for excretion from
the body.
FIGURE 26.14
The Renin-Angiotensin System
Angiotensin II stimulates the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex.
1170
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
Regulation of Calcium and Phosphate
Calcium and phosphate are both regulated through the actions of three hormones: parathyroid hormone (PTH),
dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol), and calcitonin. All three are released or synthesized in response to the blood levels
of calcium.
PTH is released from the parathyroid gland in response to a decrease in the concentration of blood calcium. The
hormone activates osteoclasts to break down bone matrix and release inorganic calcium-phosphate salts. PTH also
increases the gastrointestinal absorption of dietary calcium by converting vitamin D into dihydroxyvitamin D
(calcitriol), an active form of vitamin D that intestinal epithelial cells require to absorb calcium.
PTH raises blood calcium levels by inhibiting the loss of calcium through the kidneys. PTH also increases the loss of
phosphate through the kidneys.
Calcitonin is released from the thyroid gland in response to elevated blood levels of calcium. The hormone increases
the activity of osteoblasts, which remove calcium from the blood and incorporate calcium into the bony matrix.
26.4 Acid-Base Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the most powerful buffer system in the body
•
Explain the way in which the respiratory system affects blood pH
Proper physiological functioning depends on a very tight balance between the concentrations of acids and bases in
the blood. Acid-balance balance is measured using the pH scale, as shown in Figure 26.15. A variety of buffering
systems permits blood and other bodily fluids to maintain a narrow pH range, even in the face of perturbations. A
buffer is a chemical system that prevents a radical change in fluid pH by dampening the change in hydrogen ion
concentrations in the case of excess acid or base. Most commonly, the substance that absorbs the ions is either a
weak acid, which takes up hydroxyl ions, or a weak base, which takes up hydrogen ions.
26.4 • Acid-Base Balance
1171
FIGURE 26.15
The pH Scale
This chart shows where many common substances fall on the pH scale.
Buffer Systems in the Body
The buffer systems in the human body are extremely efficient, and different systems work at different rates. It takes
only seconds for the chemical buffers in the blood to make adjustments to pH. The respiratory tract can adjust the
blood pH upward in minutes by exhaling CO2 from the body. The renal system can also adjust blood pH through the
excretion of hydrogen ions (H+) and the conservation of bicarbonate, but this process takes hours to days to have an
effect.
The buffer systems functioning in blood plasma include plasma proteins, phosphate, and bicarbonate and carbonic
acid buffers. The kidneys help control acid-base balance by excreting hydrogen ions and generating bicarbonate
that helps maintain blood plasma pH within a normal range. Protein buffer systems work predominantly inside cells.
Protein Buffers in Blood Plasma and Cells
Nearly all proteins can function as buffers. Proteins are made up of amino acids, which contain positively charged
amino groups and negatively charged carboxyl groups. The charged regions of these molecules can bind hydrogen
and hydroxyl ions, and thus function as buffers. Buffering by proteins accounts for two-thirds of the buffering power
of the blood and most of the buffering within cells.
Hemoglobin as a Buffer
Hemoglobin is the principal protein inside of red blood cells and accounts for one-third of the mass of the cell.
During the conversion of CO2 into bicarbonate, hydrogen ions liberated in the reaction are buffered by hemoglobin,
1172
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
which is reduced by the dissociation of oxygen. This buffering helps maintain normal pH. The process is reversed in
the pulmonary capillaries to re-form CO2, which then can diffuse into the air sacs to be exhaled into the atmosphere.
This process is discussed in detail in the chapter on the respiratory system.
Phosphate Buffer
Phosphates are found in the blood in two forms: sodium dihydrogen phosphate (
), which is a weak acid,
and sodium monohydrogen phosphate (
), which is a weak base. When
comes into contact with
a strong acid, such as HCl, the base picks up a second hydrogen ion to form the weak acid
and sodium
chloride, NaCl. When
(the weak acid) comes into contact with a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide
(NaOH), the weak acid reverts back to the weak base and produces water. Acids and bases are still present, but they
hold onto the ions.
Bicarbonate-Carbonic Acid Buffer
The bicarbonate-carbonic acid buffer works in a fashion similar to phosphate buffers. The bicarbonate is regulated
in the blood by sodium, as are the phosphate ions. When sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), comes into contact with a
strong acid, such as HCl, carbonic acid (H2CO3), which is a weak acid, and NaCl are formed. When carbonic acid
comes into contact with a strong base, such as NaOH, bicarbonate and water are formed.
As with the phosphate buffer, a weak acid or weak base captures the free ions, and a significant change in pH is
prevented. Bicarbonate ions and carbonic acid are present in the blood in a 20:1 ratio if the blood pH is within the
normal range. With 20 times more bicarbonate than carbonic acid, this capture system is most efficient at buffering
changes that would make the blood more acidic. This is useful because most of the body’s metabolic wastes, such
as lactic acid and ketone bodies, are acids. Carbonic acid levels in the blood are controlled by the expiration of CO2
through the lungs. In red blood cells, carbonic anhydrase forces the dissociation of the acid, rendering the blood
less acidic. Because of this acid dissociation, CO2 is exhaled (see equations above). The level of bicarbonate in the
blood is controlled through the renal system, where bicarbonate ions in the renal filtrate are conserved and passed
back into the blood. However, the bicarbonate buffer is the primary buffering system of the IF surrounding the cells
in tissues throughout the body.
Respiratory Regulation of Acid-Base Balance
The respiratory system contributes to the balance of acids and bases in the body by regulating the blood levels of
carbonic acid (Figure 26.16). CO2 in the blood readily reacts with water to form carbonic acid, and the levels of CO2
and carbonic acid in the blood are in equilibrium. When the CO2 level in the blood rises (as it does when you hold
your breath), the excess CO2 reacts with water to form additional carbonic acid, lowering blood pH. Increasing the
rate and/or depth of respiration (which you might feel the “urge” to do after holding your breath) allows you to
exhale more CO2. The loss of CO2 from the body reduces blood levels of carbonic acid and thereby adjusts the pH
upward, toward normal levels. As you might have surmised, this process also works in the opposite direction.
Excessive deep and rapid breathing (as in hyperventilation) rids the blood of CO2 and reduces the level of carbonic
acid, making the blood too alkaline. This brief alkalosis can be remedied by rebreathing air that has been exhaled
into a paper bag. Rebreathing exhaled air will rapidly bring blood pH down toward normal.
26.4 • Acid-Base Balance
1173
FIGURE 26.16
Respiratory Regulation of Blood pH
The respiratory system can reduce blood pH by removing CO2 from the blood.
The chemical reactions that regulate the levels of CO2 and carbonic acid occur in the lungs when blood travels
through the lung’s pulmonary capillaries. Minor adjustments in breathing are usually sufficient to adjust the pH of
the blood by changing how much CO2 is exhaled. In fact, doubling the respiratory rate for less than 1 minute,
removing “extra” CO2, would increase the blood pH by 0.2. This situation is common if you are exercising
strenuously over a period of time. To keep up the necessary energy production, you would produce excess CO2 (and
lactic acid if exercising beyond your aerobic threshold). In order to balance the increased acid production, the
respiration rate goes up to remove the CO2. This helps to keep you from developing acidosis.
The body regulates the respiratory rate by the use of chemoreceptors, which primarily use CO2 as a signal.
Peripheral blood sensors are found in the walls of the aorta and carotid arteries. These sensors signal the brain to
provide immediate adjustments to the respiratory rate if CO2 levels rise or fall. Yet other sensors are found in the
brain itself. Changes in the pH of CSF affect the respiratory center in the medulla oblongata, which can directly
modulate breathing rate to bring the pH back into the normal range.
Hypercapnia, or abnormally elevated blood levels of CO2, occurs in any situation that impairs respiratory functions,
including pneumonia and congestive heart failure. Reduced breathing (hypoventilation) due to drugs such as
morphine, barbiturates, or ethanol (or even just holding one’s breath) can also result in hypercapnia. Hypocapnia, or
abnormally low blood levels of CO2, occurs with any cause of hyperventilation that drives off the CO2, such as
salicylate toxicity, elevated room temperatures, fever, or hysteria.
Renal Regulation of Acid-Base Balance
The renal regulation of the body’s acid-base balance addresses the metabolic component of the buffering system.
1174
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
Whereas the respiratory system (together with breathing centers in the brain) controls the blood levels of carbonic
acid by controlling the exhalation of CO2, the renal system controls the blood levels of bicarbonate. A decrease of
blood bicarbonate can result from the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase by certain diuretics or from excessive
bicarbonate loss due to diarrhea. Blood bicarbonate levels are also typically lower in people who have Addison’s
disease (chronic adrenal insufficiency), in which aldosterone levels are reduced, and in people who have renal
damage, such as chronic nephritis. Finally, low bicarbonate blood levels can result from elevated levels of ketones
(common in unmanaged diabetes mellitus), which bind bicarbonate in the filtrate and prevent its conservation.
Bicarbonate ions, HCO3-, found in the filtrate, are essential to the bicarbonate buffer system, yet the cells of the
tubule are not permeable to bicarbonate ions. The steps involved in supplying bicarbonate ions to the system are
seen in Figure 26.17 and are summarized below:
•
Step 1: Sodium ions are reabsorbed from the filtrate in exchange for H+ by an antiport mechanism in the apical
membranes of cells lining the renal tubule.
•
Step 2: The cells produce bicarbonate ions that can be shunted to peritubular capillaries.
•
Step 3: When CO2 is available, the reaction is driven to the formation of carbonic acid, which dissociates to form
a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion.
•
Step 4: The bicarbonate ion passes into the peritubular capillaries and returns to the blood. The hydrogen ion is
secreted into the filtrate, where it can become part of new water molecules and be reabsorbed as such, or
removed in the urine.
FIGURE 26.17
Conservation of Bicarbonate in the Kidney
Tubular cells are not permeable to bicarbonate; thus, bicarbonate is
conserved rather than reabsorbed. Steps 1 and 2 of bicarbonate conservation are indicated.
It is also possible that salts in the filtrate, such as sulfates, phosphates, or ammonia, will capture hydrogen ions. If
this occurs, the hydrogen ions will not be available to combine with bicarbonate ions and produce CO2. In such
cases, bicarbonate ions are not conserved from the filtrate to the blood, which will also contribute to a pH imbalance
and acidosis.
The hydrogen ions also compete with potassium to exchange with sodium in the renal tubules. If more potassium is
present than normal, potassium, rather than the hydrogen ions, will be exchanged, and increased potassium enters
the filtrate. When this occurs, fewer hydrogen ions in the filtrate participate in the conversion of bicarbonate into
CO2 and less bicarbonate is conserved. If there is less potassium, more hydrogen ions enter the filtrate to be
exchanged with sodium and more bicarbonate is conserved.
Chloride ions are important in neutralizing positive ion charges in the body. If chloride is lost, the body uses
bicarbonate ions in place of the lost chloride ions. Thus, lost chloride results in an increased reabsorption of
26.4 • Acid-Base Balance
1175
bicarbonate by the renal system.
26.5 Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the three blood variables considered when making a diagnosis of acidosis or alkalosis
•
Identify the source of compensation for blood pH problems of a respiratory origin
•
Identify the source of compensation for blood pH problems of a metabolic/renal origin
Normal arterial blood pH is restricted to a very narrow range of 7.35 to 7.45. A person who has a blood pH below
7.35 is considered to be in acidosis (actually, “physiological acidosis,” because blood is not truly acidic until its pH
drops below 7), and a continuous blood pH below 7.0 can be fatal. Acidosis has several symptoms, including
headache and confusion, and the individual can become lethargic and easily fatigued (Figure 26.18). A person who
has a blood pH above 7.45 is considered to be in alkalosis, and a pH above 7.8 is fatal. Some symptoms of alkalosis
include cognitive impairment (which can progress to unconsciousness), tingling or numbness in the extremities,
muscle twitching and spasm, and nausea and vomiting. Both acidosis and alkalosis can be caused by either
metabolic or respiratory disorders.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood is dependent on the level of CO2
in the body and the amount of CO2 gas exhaled through the lungs. Thus, the respiratory contribution to acid-base
balance is usually discussed in terms of CO2 (rather than of carbonic acid). Remember that a molecule of carbonic
acid is lost for every molecule of CO2 exhaled, and a molecule of carbonic acid is formed for every molecule of CO2
retained.
Disorders of the...
Acid-Base Balance: Ketoacidosis
Diabetic acidosis, or ketoacidosis, occurs most frequently in people with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
When certain tissues in the body cannot get adequate amounts of glucose, they depend on the breakdown of
fatty acids for energy. When acetyl groups break off the fatty acid chains, the acetyl groups then non-
enzymatically combine to form ketone bodies, acetoacetic acid, beta-hydroxybutyric acid, and acetone, all of
which increase the acidity of the blood. In this condition, the brain isn’t supplied with enough of its
fuel—glucose—to produce all of the ATP it requires to function.
Ketoacidosis can be severe and, if not detected and treated properly, can lead to diabetic coma, which can be
fatal. A common early symptom of ketoacidosis is deep, rapid breathing as the body attempts to drive off CO2
and compensate for the acidosis. Another common symptom is fruity-smelling breath, due to the exhalation of
acetone. Other symptoms include dry skin and mouth, a flushed face, nausea, vomiting, and stomach pain.
Treatment for diabetic coma is ingestion or injection of sugar; its prevention is the proper daily administration of
insulin.
A person who is diabetic and uses insulin can initiate ketoacidosis if a dose of insulin is missed. Among people
with type 2 diabetes, those of Hispanic and African-American descent are more likely to go into ketoacidosis
than those of other ethnic backgrounds, although the reason for this is unknown.
1176
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 26.18
Symptoms of Acidosis and Alkalosis
Symptoms of acidosis affect several organ systems. Both acidosis and alkalosis
can be diagnosed using a blood test.
Metabolic Acidosis: Primary Bicarbonate Deficiency
Metabolic acidosis occurs when the blood is too acidic (pH below 7.35) due to too little bicarbonate, a condition
called primary bicarbonate deficiency. At the normal pH of 7.40, the ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid buffer is
20:1. If a person’s blood pH drops below 7.35, then the person is in metabolic acidosis. The most common cause of
metabolic acidosis is the presence of organic acids or excessive ketone bodies in the blood. Table 26.2 lists some
other causes of metabolic acidosis.
Common Causes of Metabolic Acidosis and Blood Metabolites
Cause
Metabolite
Diarrhea
Bicarbonate
Uremia
Phosphoric, sulfuric, and lactic acids
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Increased ketone bodies
Strenuous exercise
Lactic acid
Methanol
Formic acid*
Paraldehyde
β-Hydroxybutyric acid*
Isopropanol
Propionic acid*
Ethylene glycol
Glycolic acid, and some oxalic and formic acids*
Salicylate/aspirin
Sulfasalicylic acid (SSA)*
TABLE 26.2 *Acid metabolites from ingested chemical.
The first three of the eight causes of metabolic acidosis listed are medical (or unusual physiological) conditions.
26.5 • Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
1177
Strenuous exercise can cause temporary metabolic acidosis due to the production of lactic acid. The last five causes
result from the ingestion of specific substances. The active form of aspirin is its metabolite, sulfasalicylic acid. An
overdose of aspirin causes acidosis due to the acidity of this metabolite. Metabolic acidosis can also result from
uremia, which is the retention of urea and uric acid. Metabolic acidosis can also arise from diabetic ketoacidosis,
wherein an excess of ketone bodies are present in the blood. Other causes of metabolic acidosis are a decrease in
the excretion of hydrogen ions, which inhibits the conservation of bicarbonate ions, and excessive loss of
bicarbonate ions through the gastrointestinal tract due to diarrhea.
Metabolic Alkalosis: Primary Bicarbonate Excess
Metabolic alkalosis is the opposite of metabolic acidosis. It occurs when the blood is too alkaline (pH above 7.45)
due to too much bicarbonate (called primary bicarbonate excess).
A transient excess of bicarbonate in the blood can follow ingestion of excessive amounts of bicarbonate, citrate, or
antacids for conditions such as stomach acid reflux—known as heartburn. Cushing’s disease, which is the chronic
hypersecretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the anterior pituitary gland, can cause chronic metabolic
alkalosis. The oversecretion of ACTH results in elevated aldosterone levels and an increased loss of potassium by
urinary excretion. Other causes of metabolic alkalosis include the loss of hydrochloric acid from the stomach
through vomiting, potassium depletion due to the use of diuretics for hypertension, and the excessive use of
laxatives.
Respiratory Acidosis: Primary Carbonic Acid/CO2 Excess
Respiratory acidosis occurs when the blood is overly acidic due to an excess of carbonic acid, resulting from too
much CO2 in the blood. Respiratory acidosis can result from anything that interferes with respiration, such as
pneumonia, emphysema, or congestive heart failure.
Respiratory Alkalosis: Primary Carbonic Acid/CO2 Deficiency
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when the blood is overly alkaline due to a deficiency in carbonic acid and CO2 levels in
the blood. This condition usually occurs when too much CO2 is exhaled from the lungs, as occurs in hyperventilation,
which is breathing that is deeper or more frequent than normal. An elevated respiratory rate leading to
hyperventilation can be due to extreme emotional upset or fear, fever, infections, hypoxia, or abnormally high levels
of catecholamines, such as epinephrine and norepinephrine. Surprisingly, aspirin overdose—salicylate toxicity—can
result in respiratory alkalosis as the body tries to compensate for initial acidosis.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/altitude) to see a demonstration of the effect altitude has on blood pH. What
effect does high altitude have on blood pH, and why?
Compensation Mechanisms
Various compensatory mechanisms exist to maintain blood pH within a narrow range, including buffers, respiration,
and renal mechanisms. Although compensatory mechanisms usually work very well, when one of these
mechanisms is not working properly (like kidney failure or respiratory disease), they have their limits. If the pH and
bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio are changed too drastically, the body may not be able to compensate. Moreover,
extreme changes in pH can denature proteins. Extensive damage to proteins in this way can result in disruption of
normal metabolic processes, serious tissue damage, and ultimately death.
Respiratory Compensation
Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis increases the respiratory rate to drive off CO2 and readjust the
bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio to the 20:1 level. This adjustment can occur within minutes. Respiratory
compensation for metabolic alkalosis is not as adept as its compensation for acidosis. The normal response of the
respiratory system to elevated pH is to increase the amount of CO2 in the blood by decreasing the respiratory rate to
conserve CO2. There is a limit to the decrease in respiration, however, that the body can tolerate. Hence, the
respiratory route is less efficient at compensating for metabolic alkalosis than for acidosis.
1178
26 • Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Balance
Access for free at openstax.org
Metabolic Compensation
Metabolic and renal compensation for respiratory diseases that can create acidosis revolves around the
conservation of bicarbonate ions. In cases of respiratory acidosis, the kidney increases the conservation of
bicarbonate and secretion of H+ through the exchange mechanism discussed earlier. These processes increase the
concentration of bicarbonate in the blood, reestablishing the proper relative concentrations of bicarbonate and
carbonic acid. In cases of respiratory alkalosis, the kidneys decrease the production of bicarbonate and reabsorb H+
from the tubular fluid. These processes can be limited by the exchange of potassium by the renal cells, which use a
K+-H+ exchange mechanism (antiporter).
Diagnosing Acidosis and Alkalosis
Lab tests for pH, CO2 partial pressure (PCO2), and HCO3– can identify acidosis and alkalosis, indicating whether the
imbalance is respiratory or metabolic, and the extent to which compensatory mechanisms are working. The blood
pH value, as shown in Table 26.3, indicates whether the blood is in acidosis, the normal range, or alkalosis. The
PCO2 and total HCO3– values aid in determining whether the condition is metabolic or respiratory, and whether the
patient has been able to compensate for the problem. Table 26.3 lists the conditions and laboratory results that can
be used to classify these conditions. Metabolic acid-base imbalances typically result from kidney disease, and the
respiratory system usually responds to compensate.
Types of Acidosis and Alkalosis
pH
PCO2
Total HCO3–
Metabolic acidosis
↓
N, then ↓
↓
Respiratory acidosis
↓
↑
N, then ↑
Metabolic alkalosis
↑
N, then↑
↑
Respiratory alkalosis
↑
↓
N, then ↓
TABLE 26.3 Reference values (arterial): pH: 7.35–7.45;
pCO2: male: 35–48 mm Hg, female: 32–45 mm Hg; total
venous bicarbonate: 22–29 mM. N denotes normal; ↑
denotes a rising or increased value; and ↓ denotes a
falling or decreased value.
Metabolic acidosis is problematic, as lower-than-normal amounts of bicarbonate are present in the blood. The PCO2
would be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would decrease as the body reestablishes the proper
ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Respiratory acidosis is problematic, as excess CO2 is present in the blood. Bicarbonate levels would be normal at
first, but if compensation has occurred, they would increase in an attempt to reestablish the proper ratio of
bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Alkalosis is characterized by a higher-than-normal pH. Metabolic alkalosis is problematic, as elevated pH and
excess bicarbonate are present. The PCO2 would again be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would
increase as the body attempts to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2.
Respiratory alkalosis is problematic, as CO2 deficiency is present in the bloodstream. The bicarbonate concentration
would be normal at first. When renal compensation occurs, however, the bicarbonate concentration in blood
decreases as the kidneys attempt to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO2 by
eliminating more bicarbonate to bring the pH into the physiological range.
26.5 • Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
1179
Key Terms
antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
also known as
vasopressin, a hormone that increases the volume
of water reabsorbed from the collecting tubules of
the kidney
dehydration
state of containing insufficient water in
blood and other tissues
dihydroxyvitamin D
active form of vitamin D required
by the intestinal epithelial cells for the absorption of
calcium
diuresis
excess production of urine
extracellular fluid (ECF)
fluid exterior to cells;
includes the interstitial fluid, blood plasma, and
fluids found in other reservoirs in the body
fluid compartment
fluid inside all cells of the body
constitutes a compartment system that is largely
segregated from other systems
hydrostatic pressure
pressure exerted by a fluid
against a wall, caused by its own weight or pumping
force
hypercalcemia
abnormally increased blood levels of
calcium
hypercapnia
abnormally elevated blood levels of CO2
hyperchloremia
higher-than-normal blood chloride
levels
hyperkalemia
higher-than-normal blood potassium
levels
hypernatremia
abnormal increase in blood sodium
levels
hyperphosphatemia
abnormally increased blood
phosphate levels
hypocalcemia
abnormally low blood levels of calcium
hypocapnia
abnormally low blood levels of CO2
hypochloremia
lower-than-normal blood chloride
levels
hypokalemia
abnormally decreased blood levels of
potassium
hyponatremia
lower-than-normal levels of sodium in
the blood
hypophosphatemia
abnormally low blood phosphate
levels
interstitial fluid (IF)
fluid in the small spaces
between cells not contained within blood vessels
intracellular fluid (ICF)
fluid in the cytosol of cells
metabolic acidosis
condition wherein a deficiency of
bicarbonate causes the blood to be overly acidic
metabolic alkalosis
condition wherein an excess of
bicarbonate causes the blood to be overly alkaline
plasma osmolality
ratio of solutes to a volume of
solvent in the plasma; plasma osmolality reflects a
person’s state of hydration
respiratory acidosis
condition wherein an excess of
carbonic acid or CO2 causes the blood to be overly
acidic
respiratory alkalosis
condition wherein a deficiency
of carbonic acid/CO2 levels causes the blood to be
overly alkaline
Chapter Review
26.1 Body Fluids and Fluid Compartments
Your body is mostly water. Body fluids are aqueous
solutions with differing concentrations of materials,
called solutes. An appropriate balance of water and
solute concentrations must be maintained to ensure
cellular functions. If the cytosol becomes too
concentrated due to water loss, cell functions
deteriorate. If the cytosol becomes too dilute due to
water intake by cells, cell membranes can be damaged,
and the cell can burst. Hydrostatic pressure is the force
exerted by a fluid against a wall and causes movement
of fluid between compartments. Fluid can also move
between compartments along an osmotic gradient.
Active transport processes require ATP to move some
solutes against their concentration gradients between
compartments. Passive transport of a molecule or ion
depends on its ability to pass easily through the
membrane, as well as the existence of a high to low
concentration gradient.
26.2 Water Balance
Homeostasis requires that water intake and output be
balanced. Most water intake comes through the
digestive tract via liquids and food, but roughly 10
percent of water available to the body is generated at
the end of aerobic respiration during cellular
metabolism. Urine produced by the kidneys accounts
for the largest amount of water leaving the body. The
kidneys can adjust the concentration of the urine to
reflect the body’s water needs, conserving water if the
body is dehydrated or making urine more dilute to
expel excess water when necessary. ADH is a hormone
that helps the body to retain water by increasing water
reabsorption by the kidneys.
26.3 Electrolyte Balance
Electrolytes serve various purposes, such as helping to
conduct electrical impulses along cell membranes in
neurons and muscles, stabilizing enzyme structures,
and releasing hormones from endocrine glands. The
ions in plasma also contribute to the osmotic balance
1180
26 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
that controls the movement of water between cells and
their environment. Imbalances of these ions can result
in various problems in the body, and their
concentrations are tightly regulated. Aldosterone and
angiotensin II control the exchange of sodium and
potassium between the renal filtrate and the renal
collecting tubule. Calcium and phosphate are regulated
by PTH, calcitriol, and calcitonin.
26.4 Acid-Base Balance
A variety of buffering systems exist in the body that
helps maintain the pH of the blood and other fluids
within a narrow range—between pH 7.35 and 7.45. A
buffer is a substance that prevents a radical change in
fluid pH by absorbing excess hydrogen or hydroxyl
ions. Most commonly, the substance that absorbs the
ion is either a weak acid, which takes up a hydroxyl ion
(OH-), or a weak base, which takes up a hydrogen ion
(H+). Several substances serve as buffers in the body,
including cell and plasma proteins, hemoglobin,
phosphates, bicarbonate ions, and carbonic acid. The
bicarbonate buffer is the primary buffering system of
the IF surrounding the cells in tissues throughout the
body. The respiratory and renal systems also play
major roles in acid-base homeostasis by removing CO2
and hydrogen ions, respectively, from the body.
26.5 Disorders of Acid-Base Balance
Acidosis and alkalosis describe conditions in which a
person's blood is, respectively, too acidic (pH below
7.35) and too alkaline (pH above 7.45). Each of these
conditions can be caused either by metabolic problems
related to bicarbonate levels or by respiratory
problems related to carbonic acid and CO2 levels.
Several compensatory mechanisms allow the body to
maintain a normal pH.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/bodyfluids)
to learn more about body fluids, fluid
compartments, and electrolytes. When blood
volume decreases due to sweating, from what
source is water taken in by the blood?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/
dynamicfluid) to see an explanation of the
dynamics of fluid in the body’s compartments.
What happens in tissues when capillary blood
pressure is less than osmotic pressure?
3. Read this article (http://openstax.org/l/saltwater)
for an explanation of the effect of seawater on
humans. What effect does drinking seawater have
on the body?
4. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/altitude) to
see a demonstration of the effect altitude has on
blood pH. What effect does high altitude have on
blood pH, and why?
Review Questions
5. Solute contributes to the movement of water
between cells and the surrounding medium by
________.
a.
osmotic pressure
b.
hydrostatic pressure
c.
Brownian movement
d.
random motion
6. A cation has a(n) ________ charge.
a.
neutral
b.
positive
c.
alternating
d.
negative
7. Interstitial fluid (IF) is ________.
a.
the fluid in the cytosol of the cells
b.
the fluid component of blood
c.
the fluid that bathes all of the body’s cells
except for blood cells
d.
the intracellular fluids found between
membranes
8. The largest amount of water comes into the body
via ________.
a.
metabolism
b.
foods
c.
liquids
d.
humidified air
9. The largest amount of water leaves the body via
________.
a.
the GI tract
b.
the skin as sweat
c.
expiration
d.
urine
10. Insensible water loss is water lost via ________.
a.
skin evaporation and in air from the lungs
b.
urine
c.
excessive sweating
d.
vomiting or diarrhea
26 • Interactive Link Questions
1181
11. How soon after drinking a large glass of water will
a person start increasing their urine output?
a.
5 minutes
b.
30 minutes
c.
1 hour
d.
3 hours
12. Bone serves as a mineral reserve for which two
ions?
a.
sodium and potassium
b.
calcium and phosphate
c.
chloride and bicarbonate
d.
calcium and bicarbonate
13. Electrolytes are lost mostly through ________.
a.
renal function
b.
sweating
c.
feces
d.
respiration
14. The major cation in extracellular fluid is ________.
a.
sodium
b.
potassium
c.
chloride
d.
bicarbonate
15. The major cation in intracellular fluid is ________.
a.
sodium
b.
potassium
c.
chloride
d.
bicarbonate
16. The major anion in extracellular fluid is ________.
a.
sodium
b.
potassium
c.
chloride
d.
bicarbonate
17. Most of the body’s calcium is found in ________.
a.
teeth
b.
bone
c.
plasma
d.
extracellular fluids
18. Abnormally increased blood levels of sodium are
termed ________.
a.
hyperkalemia
b.
hyperchloremia
c.
hypernatremia
d.
hypercalcemia
19. The ion with the lowest blood level is ________.
a.
sodium
b.
potassium
c.
chloride
d.
bicarbonate
20. Which two ions are most affected by aldosterone?
a.
sodium and potassium
b.
chloride and bicarbonate
c.
calcium and phosphate
d.
sodium and phosphate
21. Which of the following is the most important
buffer inside red blood cells?
a.
plasma proteins
b.
hemoglobin
c.
phosphate buffers
d.
bicarbonate: carbonic acid buffer
22. Which explanation best describes why plasma
proteins can function as buffers?
a.
Plasma proteins combine with bicarbonate to
make a stronger buffer.
b.
Plasma proteins are immune to damage from
acids.
c.
Proteins have both positive and negative
charges on their surface.
d.
Proteins are alkaline.
23. The buffer that is adjusted to control acid-base
balance is ________.
a.
plasma protein
b.
hemoglobin
c.
phosphate buffer
d.
bicarbonate: carbonic acid buffer
24. Carbonic acid levels are controlled through the
________.
a.
respiratory system
b.
renal system
c.
digestive system
d.
metabolic rate of cells
25. Bicarbonate ion concentrations in the blood are
controlled through the ________.
a.
respiratory system
b.
renal system
c.
digestive system
d.
metabolic rate of cells
26. Which reaction is catalyzed by carbonic
anhydrase?
a.
b.
c.
d.
1182
26 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
27. Which of the following is a cause of metabolic
acidosis?
a.
excessive HCl loss
b.
increased aldosterone
c.
diarrhea
d.
prolonged use of diuretics
28. Which of the following is a cause of respiratory
acidosis?
a.
emphysema
b.
low blood K+
c.
increased aldosterone
d.
increased blood ketones
29. At a pH of 7.40, the carbonic acid ratio is
________.
a.
35:1
b.
4:1
c.
20:1
d.
3:1
30. Which of the following is characterized as
metabolic alkalosis?
a.
increased pH, decreased pCO2, decreased
HCO3–
b.
increased pH, increased pCO2, increased
HCO3–
c.
decreased pH, decreased pCO2, decreased
HCO3–
d.
decreased pH, increased pCO2, increased
HCO3–
Critical Thinking Questions
31. Plasma contains more sodium than chloride. How
can this be if individual ions of sodium and
chloride exactly balance each other out, and
plasma is electrically neutral?
32. How is fluid moved from compartment to
compartment?
33. Describe the effect of ADH on renal collecting
tubules.
34. Why is it important for the amount of water intake
to equal the amount of water output?
35. Explain how the CO2 generated by cells and
exhaled in the lungs is carried as bicarbonate in
the blood.
36. How can one have an imbalance in a substance,
but not actually have elevated or deficient levels
of that substance in the body?
37. Describe the conservation of bicarbonate ions in
the renal system.
38. Describe the control of blood carbonic acid levels
through the respiratory system.
39. Case Study: Brooks is a 64-year-old admitted to
the emergency room for asthma. Their laboratory
results are as follows: pH 7.31, pCO2 higher than
normal, and total HCO3– also higher than normal.
Classify their acid-base balance as acidosis or
alkalosis, and as metabolic or respiratory. Is there
evidence of compensation? Propose the
mechanism by which asthma contributed to the
lab results seen.
40. Case Study: Kim is a 38-year-old woman admitted
to the hospital for bulimia. Her laboratory results
are as follows: pH 7.48, pCO2 in the normal range,
and total HCO3– higher than normal. Classify her
acid-base balance as acidosis or alkalosis, and as
metabolic or respiratory. Is there evidence of
compensation? Propose the mechanism by which
bulimia contributed to the lab results seen.
26 • Critical Thinking Questions
1183
1184
26 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 27
The Reproductive System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the anatomy of the reproductive systems, including their accessory structures
•
Explain the role of hypothalamic and pituitary hormones in reproductive function
•
Trace the path of a sperm cell from its initial production through fertilization of an oocyte
•
Explain the events in the ovary prior to ovulation
•
Describe the development and maturation of the sex organs and the emergence of secondary sex
characteristics during puberty
Small, uncoordinated, and slick with amniotic fluid, a newborn encounters the world outside of
her the womb. We do not often consider that a child’s birth is proof of the healthy functioning of reproductive
systems. Moreover, endocrine systems had to secrete the appropriate regulating hormones to induce the production
and release of unique male and female gametes, reproductive cells containing genetic material (one set of 23
chromosomes). Reproductive behavior or medical innovation had to facilitate the transfer of male gametes—the
sperm—to the female gamete, an oocyte (egg). Finally, combination of the gametes (fertilization) had to occur,
followed by implantation and development. In this chapter, you will explore the reproductive systems, whose
functioning can culminate in the powerful sound of a newborn’s first cry.
Figure 27.1
Ovulation Following a surge of luteinizing hormone (LH), an oocyte (immature egg cell) will be released into the uterine tube,
where it will then be available to be fertilized by sperm. Ovulation marks the end of the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle and the start of
the luteal phase.
27.1 Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the organs of the testicular reproductive system
•
Describe the structure and function of the sperm cell
•
Explain the events during spermatogenesis that produce haploid sperm from diploid cells
•
Identify the importance of testosterone in reproductive function
People often use the words "female" and "male" to describe two different concepts: our sense of gender identity,
and our biological sex as determined by our X/Y chromosomes, hormones, sex organs, and other physical
characteristics. For some people, gender identity is different from biological sex or their sex assigned at birth. In this
chapter and the next chapter, "female" and "male" refer to sex only, and the typical reproductive anatomy of XX and
XY individuals is discussed.
Unique for its role in reproduction, a gamete is a specialized sex cell, which in humans carries 23
chromosomes—one half the number in body cells. In almost all sexually reproducing species, these two haploid
cells differ in size; the smaller gamete is called the male gamete and the larger one is called the female gamete. At
fertilization, the chromosomes in one male gamete, called a sperm (or spermatozoon), combine with the
chromosomes in one female gamete, called an oocyte. The function of the male, or testicular, reproductive system
(Figure 27.2) is to produce sperm and transfer them to the female reproductive tract. The paired testes are a crucial
component in this process, as they produce both sperm and androgens, the hormones that support male
reproductive physiology. In male humans, the most important androgen is testosterone. For people with a penis,
several accessory organs and ducts aid the process of sperm maturation and transport the sperm and other seminal
components to the penis, which may deliver sperm to the female reproductive tract. In this section, we examine
each of these different structures, and discuss the process of sperm production and transport.
1186
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 27.2
Testicular Reproductive System
The structures of the testicular reproductive system include the testes, the
epididymides, the penis, and the ducts and glands that produce and carry semen. Sperm exit the scrotum through the ductus deferens,
which is bundled in the spermatic cord. The seminal vesicles and prostate gland add fluids to the sperm to create semen.
Scrotum
The testes are located in a skin-covered, highly pigmented, muscular sack called the scrotum that extends from the
body behind the penis (see Figure 27.2). This location is important in sperm production, which occurs within the
testes, and proceeds more efficiently when the testes are kept 2 to 4°C below core body temperature.
The dartos muscle makes up the subcutaneous muscle layer of the scrotum (Figure 27.3). It continues internally to
make up the scrotal septum, a wall that divides the scrotum into two compartments, each housing one testis.
Descending from the internal oblique muscle of the abdominal wall are the two cremaster muscles, which cover
each testis like a muscular net. By contracting simultaneously, the dartos and cremaster muscles can elevate the
testes in cold weather (or water), moving the testes closer to the body and decreasing the surface area of the
scrotum to retain heat. Alternatively, as the environmental temperature increases, the scrotum relaxes, moving the
testes farther from the body core and increasing scrotal surface area, which promotes heat loss. Externally, the
27.1 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1187
scrotum has a raised medial thickening on the surface called the raphae.
FIGURE 27.3
The Scrotum and Testes
This anterior view shows the structures of the scrotum and testes.
Testes
The testes (singular = testis) are the male gonads—that is, the male reproductive organs. They produce both sperm
and androgens, such as testosterone, and are active throughout the reproductive lifespan.
Paired ovals, adult testes are each approximately 4 to 5 cm in length and are housed within the scrotum (see Figure
27.3). They are surrounded by two distinct layers of protective connective tissue (Figure 27.4). The outer tunica
vaginalis is a serous membrane that has both a parietal and a thin visceral layer. Beneath the tunica vaginalis is the
tunica albuginea, a tough, white, dense connective tissue layer covering the testis itself. Not only does the tunica
albuginea cover the outside of the testis, it also invaginates to form septa that divide the testis into 300 to 400
structures called lobules. Within the lobules, sperm develop in structures called seminiferous tubules. During the
seventh month of the developmental period of a male fetus, each testis moves through the abdominal musculature
to descend into the scrotal cavity. This is called the “descent of the testis.” Cryptorchidism is the clinical term used
when one or both of the testes fail to descend into the scrotum prior to birth.
1188
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 27.4
Anatomy of the Testis
This sagittal view shows the seminiferous tubules, the site of sperm production. Formed sperm
are transferred to the epididymis, where they mature. They leave the epididymis during an ejaculation via the ductus deferens.
The tightly coiled seminiferous tubules form the bulk of each testis. They are composed of developing sperm cells
surrounding a lumen, the hollow center of the tubule, where formed sperm are released into the duct system of the
testis. Specifically, from the lumens of the seminiferous tubules, sperm move into the straight tubules (or tubuli
recti), and from there into a fine meshwork of tubules called the rete testes. Sperm leave the rete testes, and the
testis itself, through the 15 to 20 efferent ductules that cross the tunica albuginea.
Inside the seminiferous tubules are six different cell types. These include supporting cells called sustentacular
cells, as well as five types of developing sperm cells called germ cells. Germ cell development progresses from the
basement membrane—at the perimeter of the tubule—toward the lumen. Let’s look more closely at these cell types.
Sertoli Cells
Surrounding all stages of the developing sperm cells are elongate, branching Sertoli cells. Sertoli cells are a type of
supporting cell called a sustentacular cell, or sustentocyte, that are typically found in epithelial tissue. Sertoli cells
secrete signaling molecules that promote sperm production and can control whether germ cells live or die. They
extend physically around the germ cells from the peripheral basement membrane of the seminiferous tubules to the
lumen. Tight junctions between these sustentacular cells create the blood–testis barrier, which keeps bloodborne
substances from reaching the germ cells and, at the same time, keeps surface antigens on developing germ cells
from escaping into the bloodstream and prompting an autoimmune response.
Germ Cells
The least mature cells, the spermatogonia (singular = spermatogonium), line the basement membrane inside the
tubule. Spermatogonia are the stem cells of the testis, which means that they are still able to differentiate into a
variety of different cell types throughout adulthood. Spermatogonia divide to produce primary and secondary
spermatocytes, then spermatids, which finally produce formed sperm. The process that begins with spermatogonia
and concludes with the production of sperm is called spermatogenesis.
Spermatogenesis
As just noted, spermatogenesis occurs in the seminiferous tubules that form the bulk of each testis (see Figure
27.1 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1189
27.4). The process begins at puberty, after which time sperm are produced constantly throughout a male's life. One
production cycle, from spermatogonia through formed sperm, takes approximately 64 days. A new cycle starts
approximately every 16 days, although this timing is not synchronous across the seminiferous tubules. Sperm
counts—the total number of sperm a person produces—slowly decline after age 35, and some studies suggest that
smoking can lower sperm counts irrespective of age.
The process of spermatogenesis begins with mitosis of the diploid spermatogonia (Figure 27.5). Because these cells
are diploid (2n), they each have a complete copy of the person's genetic material, or 46 chromosomes. However,
mature gametes are haploid (1n), containing 23 chromosomes—meaning that daughter cells of spermatogonia must
undergo a second cellular division through the process of meiosis.
FIGURE 27.5
Spermatogenesis
(a) Mitosis of a spermatogonial stem cell involves a single cell division that results in two identical,
diploid daughter cells (spermatogonia to primary spermatocyte). Meiosis has two rounds of cell division: primary spermatocyte to
secondary spermatocyte, and then secondary spermatocyte to spermatid. This produces four haploid daughter cells (spermatids). (b) In
this electron micrograph of a cross-section of a seminiferous tubule from a rat, the lumen is the light-shaded area in the center of the
image. The location of the primary spermatocytes is near the basement membrane, and the early spermatids are approaching the lumen
(tissue source: rat). EM × 900. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Two identical diploid cells result from spermatogonia mitosis. One of these cells remains a spermatogonium, and
the other becomes a primary spermatocyte, the next stage in the process of spermatogenesis. As in mitosis, DNA is
replicated in a primary spermatocyte, before it undergoes a cell division called meiosis I. During meiosis I each of
the 23 pairs of chromosomes separates. This results in two cells, called secondary spermatocytes, each with only
half the number of chromosomes. Now a second round of cell division (meiosis II) occurs in both of the secondary
spermatocytes. During meiosis II each of the 23 replicated chromosomes divides, similar to what happens during
mitosis. Thus, meiosis results in separating the chromosome pairs. This second meiotic division results in a total of
four cells with only half of the number of chromosomes. Each of these new cells is a spermatid. Although haploid,
early spermatids look very similar to cells in the earlier stages of spermatogenesis, with a round shape, central
nucleus, and large amount of cytoplasm. A process called spermiogenesis transforms these early spermatids,
reducing the cytoplasm, and beginning the formation of the parts of a true sperm. The fifth stage of germ cell
formation—spermatozoa, or formed sperm—is the end result of this process, which occurs in the portion of the
tubule nearest the lumen. Eventually, the sperm are released into the lumen and are moved along a series of ducts
in the testis toward a structure called the epididymis for the next step of sperm maturation.
1190
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Structure of Formed Sperm
Sperm are smaller than most cells in the body; in fact, the volume of a sperm cell is 85,000 times less than that of
the female gamete. Approximately 100 to 300 million sperm are produced each day, whereas females typically
ovulate only one oocyte per month. As is true for most cells in the body, the structure of sperm cells speaks to their
function. Sperm have a distinctive head, mid-piece, and tail region (Figure 27.6). The head of the sperm contains the
extremely compact haploid nucleus with very little cytoplasm. These qualities contribute to the overall small size of
the sperm (the head is only 5 μm long). A structure called the acrosome covers most of the head of the sperm cell as
a “cap” that is filled with lysosomal enzymes important for preparing sperm to participate in fertilization. Tightly
packed mitochondria fill the mid-piece of the sperm. ATP produced by these mitochondria will power the flagellum,
which extends from the neck and the mid-piece through the tail of the sperm, enabling it to move the entire sperm
cell. The central strand of the flagellum, the axial filament, is formed from one centriole inside the maturing sperm
cell during the final stages of spermatogenesis.
FIGURE 27.6
Structure of Sperm
Sperm cells are divided into a head, containing DNA; a mid-piece, containing mitochondria; and a tail,
providing motility. The acrosome is oval and somewhat flattened.
Sperm Transport
To fertilize an egg without medical intervention, sperm must be moved from the seminiferous tubules in the testes,
through the epididymis, and—later during ejaculation—along the length of the penis and out into the female
reproductive tract.
Role of the Epididymis
From the lumen of the seminiferous tubules, the immotile sperm are surrounded by testicular fluid and moved to
the epididymis (plural = epididymides), a coiled tube attached to the testis where newly formed sperm continue to
mature (see Figure 27.4). Though the epididymis does not take up much room in its tightly coiled state, it would be
approximately 6 m (20 feet) long if straightened. It takes an average of 12 days for sperm to move through the coils
of the epididymis, with the shortest recorded transit time in humans being one day. Sperm enter the head of the
epididymis and are moved along predominantly by the contraction of smooth muscles lining the epididymal tubes.
As they are moved along the length of the epididymis, the sperm further mature and acquire the ability to move
under their own power. Once inside the female reproductive tract, they will use this ability to move independently
toward the unfertilized egg. The more mature sperm are then stored in the tail of the epididymis (the final section)
until ejaculation occurs.
Duct System
During ejaculation, sperm exit the tail of the epididymis and are pushed by smooth muscle contraction to the ductus
deferens (also called the vas deferens). The ductus deferens is a thick, muscular tube that is bundled together
inside the scrotum with connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerves into a structure called the spermatic cord (see
Figure 27.2 and Figure 27.3). Because the ductus deferens is physically accessible within the scrotum, surgical
sterilization to interrupt sperm delivery can be performed by cutting and sealing a small section of the ductus (vas)
deferens. This procedure is called a vasectomy, and it is an effective form of birth control. Although it may be
possible to reverse a vasectomy, clinicians consider the procedure permanent, and advise people to undergo it only
if they are certain they no longer wish to have children.
27.1 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1191
INTERACTIVE LINK
Interactive Link Feature
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/vasectomy) to learn about a vasectomy. As described in this video, a
vasectomy is a procedure in which a small section of the ductus (vas) deferens is removed from the scrotum. This
interrupts the path taken by sperm through the ductus deferens. If sperm do not exit through the vas, either
because the person has had a vasectomy or has not ejaculated, in what region of the testis do they remain?
From each epididymis, each ductus deferens extends superiorly into the abdominal cavity through the inguinal
canal in the abdominal wall. From here, the ductus deferens continues posteriorly to the pelvic cavity, ending
posterior to the bladder where it dilates in a region called the ampulla (meaning “flask”).
Sperm make up only 5 percent of the final volume of semen, the thick, milky fluid that is ejaculated. The bulk of
semen is produced by three critical accessory glands of the male reproductive system: the seminal vesicles, the
prostate, and the bulbourethral glands.
Seminal Vesicles
As sperm pass through the ampulla of the ductus deferens at ejaculation, they mix with fluid from the associated
seminal vesicle (see Figure 27.2). The paired seminal vesicles are glands that contribute approximately 60 percent
of the semen volume. Seminal vesicle fluid contains large amounts of fructose, which is used by the sperm
mitochondria to generate ATP to allow movement through the female reproductive tract.
The fluid, now containing both sperm and seminal vesicle secretions, next moves into the associated ejaculatory
duct, a short structure formed from the ampulla of the ductus deferens and the duct of the seminal vesicle. The
paired ejaculatory ducts transport the seminal fluid into the next structure, the prostate gland.
Prostate Gland
As shown in Figure 27.2, the centrally located prostate gland sits anterior to the rectum at the base of the bladder
surrounding the prostatic urethra (the portion of the urethra that runs within the prostate). About the size of a
walnut, the prostate is formed of both muscular and glandular tissues. It excretes an alkaline, milky fluid to the
passing seminal fluid—now called semen—that is critical to first coagulate and then decoagulate the semen
following ejaculation. The temporary thickening of semen helps retain it within the female reproductive tract,
providing time for sperm to utilize the fructose provided by seminal vesicle secretions. When the semen regains its
fluid state, sperm can then pass farther into the female reproductive tract.
The prostate normally doubles in size during puberty. At approximately age 25, it gradually begins to enlarge again.
This enlargement does not usually cause problems; however, abnormal growth of the prostate, or benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH), can cause constriction of the urethra as it passes through the middle of the prostate gland,
leading to a number of lower urinary tract symptoms, such as a frequent and intense urge to urinate, a weak stream,
and a sensation that the bladder has not emptied completely. By age 60, approximately 40 percent of males have
some degree of BPH. By age 80, the number of affected individuals has jumped to as many as 80 percent.
Treatments for BPH attempt to relieve the pressure on the urethra so that urine can flow more normally. Mild to
moderate symptoms are treated with medication, whereas severe enlargement of the prostate is treated by surgery
in which a portion of the prostate tissue is removed.
Another common disorder involving the prostate is prostate cancer. According to the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in males. However, some forms of
prostate cancer grow very slowly and thus may not ever require treatment. Aggressive forms of prostate cancer, in
contrast, involve metastasis to vulnerable organs like the lungs and brain. There is no link between BPH and
prostate cancer, but the symptoms are similar. Prostate cancer is detected by a medical history, a blood test, and a
rectal exam that allows physicians to palpate the prostate and check for unusual masses. If a mass is detected, the
cancer diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the cells.
Bulbourethral Glands
The final addition to semen is made by two bulbourethral glands (or Cowper’s glands) that release a thick, salty
fluid that lubricates the end of the urethra and the vagina, and helps to clean urine residues from the penile urethra.
The fluid from these accessory glands is released after the male becomes sexually aroused, and shortly before the
1192
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
release of the semen. It is therefore sometimes called pre-ejaculate. It is important to note that, in addition to the
lubricating proteins, it is possible for bulbourethral fluid to pick up sperm already present in the urethra, and
therefore it may be able to cause pregnancy.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Interactive Link Feature
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/spermpath) to explore the structures of the male reproductive system and
the path of sperm, which starts in the testes and ends as the sperm leave the penis through the urethra. Where are
sperm deposited after they leave the ejaculatory duct?
The Penis
The penis is the male organ of copulation (sexual intercourse). It is flaccid for non-sexual actions, such as urination,
and turgid and rod-like with sexual arousal. When erect, the stiffness of the organ allows it to penetrate into the
vagina and deposit semen into the female reproductive tract.
FIGURE 27.7
Cross-Sectional Anatomy of the Penis
Three columns of erectile tissue make up most of the volume of the penis.
The shaft of the penis surrounds the urethra (Figure 27.7). The shaft is composed of three column-like chambers of
erectile tissue that span the length of the shaft. Each of the two larger lateral chambers is called a corpus
cavernosum (plural = corpora cavernosa). Together, these make up the bulk of the penis. The corpus spongiosum,
which can be felt as a raised ridge on the erect penis, is a smaller chamber that surrounds the spongy, or penile,
urethra. The end of the penis, called the glans penis, has a high concentration of nerve endings, resulting in very
sensitive skin that influences the likelihood of ejaculation (see Figure 27.2). The skin from the shaft extends down
27.1 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1193
over the glans and forms a collar called the prepuce (or foreskin). The foreskin also contains a dense concentration
of nerve endings, and both lubricate and protect the sensitive skin of the glans penis. A surgical procedure called
circumcision, often performed for religious or social reasons, removes the prepuce, typically within days of birth.
Both sexual arousal and REM sleep (during which dreaming occurs) can induce an erection. Penile erections are the
result of vasocongestion, or engorgement of the tissues because of more arterial blood flowing into the penis than is
leaving in the veins. During sexual arousal, nitric oxide (NO) is released from nerve endings near blood vessels
within the corpora cavernosa and spongiosum. Release of NO activates a signaling pathway that results in relaxation
of the smooth muscles that surround the penile arteries, causing them to dilate. This dilation increases the amount
of blood that can enter the penis and induces the endothelial cells in the penile arterial walls to also secrete NO and
perpetuate the vasodilation. The rapid increase in blood volume fills the erectile chambers, and the increased
pressure of the filled chambers compresses the thin-walled penile venules, preventing venous drainage of the penis.
The result of this increased blood flow to the penis and reduced blood return from the penis is erection. Depending
on the flaccid dimensions of a penis, it can increase in size slightly or greatly during erection, with the average length
of an erect penis measuring approximately 15 cm.
Testosterone
Testosterone, an androgen, is a steroid hormone produced by Leydig cells. The alternate term for Leydig cells,
interstitial cells, reflects their location between the seminiferous tubules in the testes. In male embryos,
testosterone is secreted by Leydig cells by the seventh week of development, with peak concentrations reached in
the second trimester. This early release of testosterone results in the anatomical differentiation of the male sexual
organs. In childhood, testosterone concentrations are low. They increase during puberty, activating characteristic
physical changes and initiating spermatogenesis.
Functions of Testosterone
The continued presence of testosterone is necessary to keep the male reproductive system working properly, and
Disorders of the...
Male Reproductive System
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a condition in which a person has difficulty either initiating or maintaining an
erection. The combined prevalence of minimal, moderate, and complete ED is approximately 40 percent in
males at age 40, and reaches nearly 70 percent by 70 years of age. In addition to aging, ED is associated with
diabetes, vascular disease, psychiatric disorders, prostate disorders, the use of some drugs such as certain
antidepressants, and problems with the testes resulting in low testosterone concentrations. These physical and
emotional conditions can lead to interruptions in the vasodilation pathway and result in an inability to achieve an
erection.
Recall that the release of NO induces relaxation of the smooth muscles that surround the penile arteries, leading
to the vasodilation necessary to achieve an erection. To reverse the process of vasodilation, an enzyme called
phosphodiesterase (PDE) degrades a key component of the NO signaling pathway called cGMP. There are
several different forms of this enzyme, and PDE type 5 is the type of PDE found in the tissues of the penis.
Scientists discovered that inhibiting PDE5 increases blood flow, and allows vasodilation of the penis to occur.
PDEs and the vasodilation signaling pathway are found in the vasculature in other parts of the body. In the
1990s, clinical trials of a PDE5 inhibitor called sildenafil were initiated to treat hypertension and angina pectoris
(chest pain caused by poor blood flow through the heart). The trial showed that the drug was not effective at
treating heart conditions, but many men experienced erection and priapism (erection lasting longer than 4
hours). Because of this, a clinical trial was started to investigate the ability of sildenafil to promote erections in
men suffering from ED. In 1998, the FDA approved the drug, marketed as Viagra®. Since approval of the drug,
sildenafil and similar PDE inhibitors now generate over a billion dollars a year in sales, and are reported to be
effective in treating approximately 70 to 85 percent of cases of ED. Importantly, men with health
problems—especially those with cardiac disease taking nitrates—should avoid Viagra or talk to their physician to
find out if they are a candidate for the use of this drug, as deaths have been reported for at-risk users.
1194
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Leydig cells produce approximately 6 to 7 mg of testosterone per day. Testicular steroidogenesis (the manufacture
of androgens, including testosterone) results in testosterone concentrations that are 100 times higher in the testes
than in the circulation. Maintaining these normal concentrations of testosterone promotes spermatogenesis,
whereas low levels of testosterone can lead to infertility. In addition to intratesticular secretion, testosterone is also
released into the systemic circulation and plays an important role in muscle development, bone growth, the
development of secondary sex characteristics, and maintaining libido (sex drive) in both males and females. In
females, the ovaries secrete small amounts of testosterone, although most is converted to estradiol. A small amount
of testosterone is also secreted by the adrenal glands in both sexes.
Control of Testosterone
The regulation of testosterone concentrations throughout the body is critical for male reproductive function. The
intricate interplay between the endocrine system and the reproductive system is shown in Figure 27.8.
FIGURE 27.8
Regulation of Testosterone Production
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland regulate the production of testosterone
and the cells that assist in spermatogenesis. GnRH activates the anterior pituitary to produce LH and FSH, which in turn stimulate Leydig
cells and Sertoli cells, respectively. The system is a negative feedback loop because the end products of the pathway, testosterone and
inhibin, interact with the activity of GnRH to inhibit their own production.
The regulation of Leydig cell production of testosterone begins outside of the testes. The hypothalamus and the
pituitary gland in the brain integrate external and internal signals to control testosterone synthesis and secretion.
The regulation begins in the hypothalamus. Pulsatile release of a hormone called gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) from the hypothalamus stimulates the endocrine release of hormones from the pituitary gland. Binding of
GnRH to its receptors on the anterior pituitary gland stimulates release of the two gonadotropins: luteinizing
hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These two hormones are critical for reproductive function in
all humans. In the testes, FSH binds predominantly to the Sertoli cells within the seminiferous tubules to promote
spermatogenesis. FSH also stimulates the Sertoli cells to produce hormones called inhibins, which function to
inhibit FSH release from the pituitary, thus reducing testosterone secretion. These polypeptide hormones correlate
directly with Sertoli cell function and sperm number; inhibin B can be used as a marker of spermatogenic activity. LH
binds to receptors on Leydig cells in the testes and upregulates the production of testosterone.
A negative feedback loop predominantly controls the synthesis and secretion of both FSH and LH. Low blood
concentrations of testosterone stimulate the hypothalamic release of GnRH. GnRH then stimulates the anterior
pituitary to secrete LH into the bloodstream. In the testis, LH binds to LH receptors on Leydig cells and stimulates
the release of testosterone. When concentrations of testosterone in the blood reach a critical threshold,
27.1 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Testicular Reproductive System
1195
testosterone itself will bind to androgen receptors on both the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary, inhibiting
the synthesis and secretion of GnRH and LH, respectively. When the blood concentrations of testosterone once
again decline, testosterone no longer interacts with the receptors to the same degree and GnRH and LH are once
again secreted, stimulating more testosterone production. This same process occurs with FSH and inhibin to control
spermatogenesis.
27.2 Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the organs of the ovarian reproductive system
•
List the steps of oogenesis
•
Describe the hormonal changes that occur during the ovarian and menstrual cycles
•
Trace the path of an oocyte from ovary to fertilization
The female, or ovarian, reproductive system functions to produce gametes and reproductive hormones, just like the
male reproductive system; however, it also has the additional task of supporting the developing fetus and delivering
it to the outside world. Unlike its male counterpart, the female reproductive system is located primarily inside the
pelvic cavity (Figure 27.9). Recall that the ovaries are the female gonads. The gamete they produce is called an
oocyte. We’ll discuss the production of oocytes in detail shortly. First, let’s look at some of the structures of the
female reproductive system.
Aging and the...
Male Reproductive System
Declines in Leydig cell activity can occur in males beginning at 40 to 50 years of age. The resulting reduction in
circulating testosterone concentrations can lead to symptoms of andropause, also known as male menopause.
While the reduction in sex steroids is akin to female menopause, there is no clear sign—such as a lack of a
menstrual period—to denote the initiation of andropause. Instead, people with this condition report feelings of
fatigue, reduced muscle mass, depression, anxiety, irritability, loss of libido, and insomnia. A reduction in
spermatogenesis resulting in lowered fertility is also reported, and sexual dysfunction can also be associated
with andropausal symptoms.
Whereas some researchers believe that certain aspects of andropause are difficult to tease apart from aging in
general, testosterone replacement is sometimes prescribed to alleviate some symptoms. Recent studies have
shown a benefit from androgen replacement therapy on the new onset of depression in elderly males; however,
other studies caution against testosterone replacement for long-term treatment of andropause symptoms,
showing that high doses can sharply increase the risk of both heart disease and prostate cancer.
1196
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 27.9
Female Reproductive System
The major organs of the female reproductive system are located inside the pelvic cavity.
External Female Genitals
The external female reproductive structures are referred to collectively as the vulva (Figure 27.10). The mons pubis
is a pad of fat that is located at the anterior, over the pubic bone. After puberty, it becomes covered in pubic hair. The
labia majora (labia = “lips”; majora = “larger”) are folds of hair-covered skin that begin just posterior to the mons
pubis. The thinner and more pigmented labia minora (labia = “lips”; minora = “smaller”) extend medial to the labia
majora. Although they naturally vary in shape and size from person to person, the labia minora serve to protect the
urethra and the entrance to the reproductive tract.
The superior, anterior portions of the labia minora come together to encircle the clitoris (or glans clitoris), an organ
that originates from the same cells as the glans penis and has abundant nerves that make it important in sexual
sensation and orgasm. The hymen is a thin membrane that sometimes partially covers the entrance to the vagina.
An intact hymen cannot be used as an indication of “virginity”; even at birth, this is only a partial membrane, as
menstrual fluid and other secretions must be able to exit the body, regardless of penile–vaginal intercourse. The
vaginal opening is located between the opening of the urethra and the anus. It is flanked by outlets to the
Bartholin’s glands (or greater vestibular glands).
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1197
FIGURE 27.10
The Vulva
The external female genitalia are referred to collectively as the vulva.
Vagina
The vagina, shown at the bottom of Figure 27.9 and Figure 27.10, is a muscular canal (approximately 10 cm long)
that serves as the entrance to the reproductive tract. It also serves as the exit from the uterus during menses and
childbirth. The outer walls of the anterior and posterior vagina are formed into longitudinal columns, or ridges, and
the superior portion of the vagina—called the fornix—meets the protruding uterine cervix. The walls of the vagina are
lined with an outer, fibrous adventitia; a middle layer of smooth muscle; and an inner mucous membrane with
transverse folds called rugae. Together, the middle and inner layers allow the expansion of the vagina to
accommodate intercourse and childbirth. The thin, perforated hymen can partially surround the opening to the
vaginal orifice. The hymen can be ruptured with strenuous physical exercise, penile–vaginal intercourse, and
childbirth. The Bartholin’s glands and the lesser vestibular glands (located near the clitoris) secrete mucus, which
keeps the vestibular area moist.
The vagina is home to a normal population of microorganisms that help to protect against infection by pathogenic
bacteria, yeast, or other organisms that can enter the vagina. In a healthy person, the most predominant type of
vaginal bacteria is from the genus Lactobacillus. This family of beneficial bacterial flora secretes lactic acid, and thus
protects the vagina by maintaining an acidic pH (below 4.5). Potential pathogens are less likely to survive in these
acidic conditions. Lactic acid, in combination with other vaginal secretions, makes the vagina a self-cleansing organ.
However, douching—or washing out the vagina with fluid—can disrupt the normal balance of healthy
microorganisms, and actually increase risk for infections and irritation. Indeed, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommend that people do not douche, and that they allow the vagina to maintain
its normal healthy population of protective microbial flora.
Ovaries
The ovaries are the female gonads (see Figure 27.9). Paired ovals, they are each about 2 to 3 cm in length, about
the size of an almond. The ovaries are located within the pelvic cavity, and are supported by the mesovarium, an
extension of the peritoneum that connects the ovaries to the broad ligament. Extending from the mesovarium itself
is the suspensory ligament that contains the ovarian blood and lymph vessels. Finally, the ovary itself is attached to
the uterus via the ovarian ligament.
The ovary comprises an outer covering of cuboidal epithelium called the ovarian surface epithelium that is
superficial to a dense connective tissue covering called the tunica albuginea. Beneath the tunica albuginea is the
cortex, or outer portion, of the organ. The cortex is composed of a tissue framework called the ovarian stroma that
forms the bulk of the adult ovary. Oocytes develop within the outer layer of this stroma, each surrounded by
1198
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
supporting cells. This grouping of an oocyte and its supporting cells is called a follicle. The growth and development
of ovarian follicles will be described shortly. Beneath the cortex lies the inner ovarian medulla, the site of blood
vessels, lymph vessels, and the nerves of the ovary. You will learn more about the overall anatomy of the female
reproductive system at the end of this section.
The Ovarian Cycle
The ovarian cycle is a set of predictable changes in oocytes and ovarian follicles. During the reproductive years, it is
a roughly 28-day cycle that can be correlated with, but is not the same as, the menstrual cycle (discussed shortly).
The cycle includes two interrelated processes: oogenesis (the production of gametes) and folliculogenesis (the
growth and development of ovarian follicles).
Oogenesis
Gametogenesis in females is called oogenesis. The process begins with the ovarian stem cells, or oogonia (Figure
27.11). Oogonia are formed during fetal development, and divide via mitosis, much like spermatogonia in the testis.
Unlike spermatogonia, however, oogonia form primary oocytes in the fetal ovary prior to birth. These primary
oocytes are then arrested in this stage of meiosis I, only to resume it years later, beginning at puberty and
continuing until the person is near menopause (the cessation of a female's reproductive functions). The number of
primary oocytes present in the ovaries declines from one to two million in an infant, to approximately 400,000 at
puberty, to zero by the end of menopause.
The initiation of ovulation—the release of an oocyte from the ovary—marks the transition from puberty into
reproductive maturity. From then on, throughout a the reproductive years, ovulation occurs approximately once
every 28 days. Just prior to ovulation, a surge of luteinizing hormone triggers the resumption of meiosis in a primary
oocyte. This initiates the transition from primary to secondary oocyte. However, as you can see in Figure 27.11, this
cell division does not result in two identical cells. Instead, the cytoplasm is divided unequally, and one daughter cell
is much larger than the other. This larger cell, the secondary oocyte, eventually leaves the ovary during ovulation.
The smaller cell, called the first polar body, may or may not complete meiosis and produce second polar bodies; in
either case, it eventually disintegrates. Therefore, even though oogenesis produces up to four cells, only one
survives.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1199
FIGURE 27.11
Oogenesis
The unequal cell division of oogenesis produces one to three polar bodies that later degrade, as well as a
single haploid ovum, which is produced only if there is penetration of the secondary oocyte by a sperm cell.
How does the diploid secondary oocyte become an ovum—the haploid female gamete? Meiosis of a secondary
oocyte is completed only if a sperm succeeds in penetrating its barriers. Meiosis II then resumes, producing one
haploid ovum that, at the instant of fertilization by a (haploid) sperm, becomes the first diploid cell of the new
offspring (a zygote). Thus, the ovum can be thought of as a brief, transitional, haploid stage between the diploid
oocyte and diploid zygote.
The larger amount of cytoplasm contained in the female gamete is used to supply the developing zygote with
nutrients during the period between fertilization and implantation into the uterus. Interestingly, sperm contribute
only DNA at fertilization —not cytoplasm. Therefore, the cytoplasm and all of the cytoplasmic organelles in the
developing embryo are of egg-derived origin. This includes mitochondria, which contain their own DNA. Scientific
research in the 1980s determined that mitochondrial DNA was maternally inherited, meaning that you can trace
your mitochondrial DNA directly to your biological mother, her mother, and so on back through your female
ancestors.
Everyday Connection
Mapping Human History with Mitochondrial DNA
When we talk about human DNA, we’re usually referring to nuclear DNA; that is, the DNA coiled into
chromosomal bundles in the nucleus of our cells. We inherit half of our nuclear DNA from one parent, and half
from the other parent. However, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) comes only from the mitochondria in the
cytoplasm of the fat ovum we inherit from our mother. Our mother received mtDNA from their mother, who got it
from their mother, and so on. Each of our cells contains approximately 1700 mitochondria, with each
mitochondrion packed with mtDNA containing approximately 37 genes.
1200
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Folliculogenesis
Again, ovarian follicles are oocytes and their supporting cells. They grow and develop in a process called
folliculogenesis, which typically leads to ovulation of one follicle approximately every 28 days, along with death to
multiple other follicles. The death of ovarian follicles is called atresia, and can occur at any point during follicular
development. Recall that, a female infant at birth will have one to two million oocytes within the ovarian follicles,
and that this number declines throughout life until menopause, when no follicles remain. As you’ll see next, follicles
progress from primordial, to primary, to secondary and tertiary stages prior to ovulation—with the oocyte inside the
follicle remaining as a primary oocyte until right before ovulation.
Folliculogenesis begins with follicles in a resting state. These small primordial follicles are present in newborn
females and are the prevailing follicle type in the adult ovary (Figure 27.12). Primordial follicles have only a single
flat layer of support cells, called granulosa cells, that surround the oocyte, and they can stay in this resting state for
years—some until right before menopause.
After puberty, a few primordial follicles will respond to a recruitment signal each day, and will join a pool of
immature growing follicles called primary follicles. Primary follicles start with a single layer of granulosa cells, but
the granulosa cells then become active and transition from a flat or squamous shape to a rounded, cuboidal shape
as they increase in size and proliferate. As the granulosa cells divide, the follicles—now called secondary follicles
(see Figure 27.12)—increase in diameter, adding a new outer layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and theca
cells—cells that work with the granulosa cells to produce estrogens.
Within the growing secondary follicle, the primary oocyte now secretes a thin acellular membrane called the zona
pellucida that will play a critical role in fertilization. A thick fluid, called follicular fluid, that has formed between the
granulosa cells also begins to collect into one large pool, or antrum. Follicles in which the antrum has become large
and fully formed are considered tertiary follicles (or antral follicles). Several follicles reach the tertiary stage at the
same time, and most of these will undergo atresia. The one that does not die will continue to grow and develop until
ovulation, when it will expel its secondary oocyte surrounded by several layers of granulosa cells from the ovary.
Keep in mind that most follicles don’t make it to this point. In fact, roughly 99 percent of the follicles in the ovary will
undergo atresia, which can occur at any stage of folliculogenesis.
Mutations (changes) in mtDNA occur spontaneously in a somewhat organized pattern at regular intervals in
human history. By analyzing these mutational relationships, researchers have been able to determine that we
can all trace our ancestry back to one female who lived in Africa about 200,000 years ago. More precisely, that
human is our most recent common ancestor through matrilineal descent.
This doesn’t mean that everyone’s mtDNA today looks exactly like that of our common ancestor. Because of the
spontaneous mutations in mtDNA that have occurred over the centuries, researchers can map different
“branches” off of the “main trunk” of our mtDNA family tree. Your mtDNA might have a pattern of mutations that
aligns more closely with one branch, and your neighbor’s may align with another branch. Still, all branches
eventually lead back to the common ancestor.
But what happened to the mtDNA of all of the other Homo sapiens females who were living 200,000 years ago?
Researchers explain that, over the centuries, their female descendants died childless or with only male children,
and thus, their maternal line—and its mtDNA—ended.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1201
FIGURE 27.12
Folliculogenesis
(a) The maturation of a follicle is shown in a clockwise direction proceeding from the primordial
follicles. FSH stimulates the growth of a tertiary follicle, and LH stimulates the production of estrogen by granulosa and theca cells. Once
the follicle is mature, it ruptures and releases the oocyte. Cells remaining in the follicle then develop into the corpus luteum. (b) In this
electron micrograph of a secondary follicle, the oocyte, theca cells (thecae folliculi), and developing antrum are clearly visible. EM × 1100.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Hormonal Control of the Ovarian Cycle
The process of development that we have just described, from primordial follicle to early tertiary follicle, takes
approximately two months in humans. The final stages of development of a small cohort of tertiary follicles, ending
with ovulation of a secondary oocyte, occur over a course of approximately 28 days. These changes are regulated by
many of the same hormones that regulate the male reproductive system, including GnRH, LH, and FSH.
1202
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
As in males, the hypothalamus produces GnRH, a hormone that signals the anterior pituitary gland to produce the
gonadotropins FSH and LH (Figure 27.13). These gonadotropins leave the pituitary and travel through the
bloodstream to the ovaries, where they bind to receptors on the granulosa and theca cells of the follicles. FSH
stimulates the follicles to grow (hence its name of follicle-stimulating hormone), and the five or six tertiary follicles
expand in diameter. The release of LH also stimulates the granulosa and theca cells of the follicles to produce the
sex steroid hormone estradiol, a type of estrogen. This phase of the ovarian cycle, when the tertiary follicles are
growing and secreting estrogen, is known as the follicular phase.
The more granulosa and theca cells a follicle has (that is, the larger and more developed it is), the more estrogen it
will produce in response to LH stimulation. As a result of these large follicles producing large amounts of estrogen,
systemic plasma estrogen concentrations increase. Following a classic negative feedback loop, the high
concentrations of estrogen will stimulate the hypothalamus and pituitary to reduce the production of GnRH, LH, and
FSH. Because the large tertiary follicles require FSH to grow and survive at this point, this decline in FSH caused by
negative feedback leads most of them to die (atresia). Typically only one follicle, now called the dominant follicle,
will survive this reduction in FSH, and this follicle will be the one that releases an oocyte. Scientists have studied
many factors that lead to a particular follicle becoming dominant: size, the number of granulosa cells, and the
number of FSH receptors on those granulosa cells all contribute to a follicle becoming the one surviving dominant
follicle.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1203
FIGURE 27.13
Hormonal Regulation of Ovulation
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland regulate the ovarian cycle and ovulation.
GnRH activates the anterior pituitary to produce LH and FSH, which stimulate the production of estrogen and progesterone by the ovaries.
When only the one dominant follicle remains in the ovary, it again begins to secrete estrogen. It produces more
estrogen than all of the developing follicles did together before the negative feedback occurred. It produces so
much estrogen that the normal negative feedback doesn’t occur. Instead, these extremely high concentrations of
systemic plasma estrogen trigger a regulatory switch in the anterior pituitary that responds by secreting large
amounts of LH and FSH into the bloodstream (see Figure 27.13). The positive feedback loop by which more
estrogen triggers release of more LH and FSH only occurs at this point in the cycle.
It is this large burst of LH (called the LH surge) that leads to ovulation of the dominant follicle. The LH surge induces
many changes in the dominant follicle, including stimulating the resumption of meiosis of the primary oocyte to a
secondary oocyte. As noted earlier, the polar body that results from unequal cell division simply degrades. The LH
surge also triggers proteases (enzymes that cleave proteins) to break down structural proteins in the ovary wall on
the surface of the bulging dominant follicle. This degradation of the wall, combined with pressure from the large,
fluid-filled antrum, results in the expulsion of the oocyte surrounded by granulosa cells into the peritoneal cavity.
1204
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
This release is ovulation.
In the next section, you will follow the ovulated oocyte as it travels toward the uterus, but there is one more
important event that occurs in the ovarian cycle. The surge of LH also stimulates a change in the granulosa and
theca cells that remain in the follicle after the oocyte has been ovulated. This change is called luteinization (recall
that the full name of LH is luteinizing hormone), and it transforms the collapsed follicle into a new endocrine
structure called the corpus luteum, a term meaning “yellowish body” (see Figure 27.12). Instead of estrogen, the
luteinized granulosa and theca cells of the corpus luteum begin to produce large amounts of the sex steroid
hormone progesterone, a hormone that is critical for the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy.
Progesterone triggers negative feedback at the hypothalamus and pituitary, which keeps GnRH, LH, and FSH
secretions low, so no new dominant follicles develop at this time.
The post-ovulatory phase of progesterone secretion is known as the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle. If pregnancy
does not occur within 10 to 12 days, the corpus luteum will stop secreting progesterone and degrade into the
corpus albicans, a nonfunctional “whitish body” that will disintegrate in the ovary over a period of several months.
During this time of reduced progesterone secretion, FSH and LH are once again stimulated, and the follicular phase
begins again with a new cohort of early tertiary follicles beginning to grow and secrete estrogen.
The Uterine Tubes
The uterine tubes (also called fallopian tubes or oviducts) serve as the conduit of the oocyte from the ovary to the
uterus (Figure 27.14). Each of the two uterine tubes is close to, but not directly connected to, the ovary and divided
into sections. The isthmus is the narrow medial end of each uterine tube that is connected to the uterus. The wide
distal infundibulum flares out with slender, finger-like projections called fimbriae. The middle region of the tube,
called the ampulla, is where fertilization often occurs. The uterine tubes also have three layers: an outer serosa, a
middle smooth muscle layer, and an inner mucosal layer. In addition to its mucus-secreting cells, the inner mucosa
contains ciliated cells that beat in the direction of the uterus, producing a current that will be critical to move the
oocyte.
Following ovulation, the secondary oocyte surrounded by a few granulosa cells is released into the peritoneal cavity.
The nearby uterine tube, either left or right, receives the oocyte. Unlike sperm, oocytes lack flagella, and therefore
cannot move on their own. So how do they travel into the uterine tube and toward the uterus? High concentrations
of estrogen that occur around the time of ovulation induce contractions of the smooth muscle along the length of
the uterine tube. These contractions occur every 4 to 8 seconds, and the result is a coordinated movement that
sweeps the surface of the ovary and the pelvic cavity. Current flowing toward the uterus is generated by coordinated
beating of the cilia that line the outside and lumen of the length of the uterine tube. These cilia beat more strongly in
response to the high estrogen concentrations that occur around the time of ovulation. As a result of these
mechanisms, the oocyte–granulosa cell complex is pulled into the interior of the tube. Once inside, the muscular
contractions and beating cilia move the oocyte slowly toward the uterus. When fertilization does occur, sperm
typically meet the egg while it is still moving through the ampulla.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Interactive Link
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ovulation) to observe ovulation and its initiation in response to the release of
FSH and LH from the pituitary gland. What specialized structures help guide the oocyte from the ovary into the
uterine tube?
If the oocyte is successfully fertilized, the resulting zygote will begin to divide into two cells, then four, and so on, as
it makes its way through the uterine tube and into the uterus. There, it will implant and continue to grow. If the egg
is not fertilized, it will simply degrade—either in the uterine tube or in the uterus, where it may be shed with the next
menstrual period.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1205
FIGURE 27.14
Ovaries, Uterine Tubes, and Uterus
This anterior view shows the relationship of the ovaries, uterine tubes (oviducts),
and uterus. Sperm enter through the vagina, and fertilization of an ovulated oocyte usually occurs in the distal uterine tube. From left to
right, LM × 400, LM × 20. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The open-ended structure of the uterine tubes can have significant health consequences if bacteria or other
contagions enter through the vagina and move through the uterus, into the tubes, and then into the pelvic cavity. If
this is left unchecked, a bacterial infection (sepsis) could quickly become life-threatening. The spread of an infection
in this manner is of special concern when unskilled practitioners perform abortions in non-sterile conditions. Sepsis
is also associated with sexually transmitted bacterial infections, especially gonorrhea and chlamydia. These
increase a person's risk for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), infection of the uterine tubes or other reproductive
organs. Even when resolved, PID can leave scar tissue in the tubes, leading to infertility.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Interactive Link
Watch this series of videos (http://openstax.org/l/oocyte) to look at the movement of the oocyte through the ovary.
The cilia in the uterine tube promote movement of the oocyte. What would likely occur if the cilia were paralyzed at
the time of ovulation?
The Uterus and Cervix
The uterus is the muscular organ that nourishes and supports the growing embryo (see Figure 27.14). Its average
size is approximately 5 cm wide by 7 cm long (approximately 2 in by 3 in) when a female is not pregnant. It has
three sections. The portion of the uterus superior to the opening of the uterine tubes is called the fundus. The
middle section of the uterus is called the body of uterus (or corpus). The cervix is the narrow inferior portion of the
uterus that projects into the vagina. The cervix produces mucus secretions that become thin and stringy under the
influence of high systemic plasma estrogen concentrations, and these secretions can facilitate sperm movement
through the reproductive tract.
Several ligaments maintain the position of the uterus within the abdominopelvic cavity. The broad ligament is a fold
of peritoneum that serves as a primary support for the uterus, extending laterally from both sides of the uterus and
attaching it to the pelvic wall. The round ligament attaches to the uterus near the uterine tubes, and extends to the
labia majora. Finally, the uterosacral ligament stabilizes the uterus posteriorly by its connection from the cervix to
the pelvic wall.
The wall of the uterus is made up of three layers. The most superficial layer is the serous membrane, or
perimetrium, which consists of epithelial tissue that covers the exterior portion of the uterus. The middle layer, or
myometrium, is a thick layer of smooth muscle responsible for uterine contractions. Most of the uterus is
myometrial tissue, and the muscle fibers run horizontally, vertically, and diagonally, allowing the powerful
contractions that occur during labor and the less powerful contractions (or cramps) that help to expel menstrual
blood during a woman’s period. Anteriorly directed myometrial contractions also occur near the time of ovulation,
1206
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
and are thought to possibly facilitate the transport of sperm through the female reproductive tract.
The innermost layer of the uterus is called the endometrium. The endometrium contains a connective tissue lining,
the lamina propria, which is covered by epithelial tissue that lines the lumen. Structurally, the endometrium consists
of two layers: the stratum basalis and the stratum functionalis (the basal and functional layers). The stratum basalis
layer is part of the lamina propria and is adjacent to the myometrium; this layer does not shed during menses. In
contrast, the thicker stratum functionalis layer contains the glandular portion of the lamina propria and the
endothelial tissue that lines the uterine lumen. It is the stratum functionalis that grows and thickens in response to
increased levels of estrogen and progesterone. In the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, special branches off of
the uterine artery called spiral arteries supply the thickened stratum functionalis. This inner functional layer
provides the proper site of implantation for the fertilized egg, and—should fertilization not occur—it is only the
stratum functionalis layer of the endometrium that sheds during menstruation.
Recall that during the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle, the tertiary follicles are growing and secreting estrogen.
At the same time, the stratum functionalis of the endometrium is thickening to prepare for a potential implantation.
The post-ovulatory increase in progesterone, which characterizes the luteal phase, is key for maintaining a thick
stratum functionalis. As long as a functional corpus luteum is present in the ovary, the endometrial lining is prepared
for implantation. Indeed, if an embryo implants, signals are sent to the corpus luteum to continue secreting
progesterone to maintain the endometrium, and thus maintain the pregnancy. If an embryo does not implant, no
signal is sent to the corpus luteum and it degrades, ceasing progesterone production and ending the luteal phase.
Without progesterone, the endometrium thins and, under the influence of prostaglandins, the spiral arteries of the
endometrium constrict and rupture, preventing oxygenated blood from reaching the endometrial tissue. As a result,
endometrial tissue dies and blood, pieces of the endometrial tissue, and white blood cells are shed through the
vagina during menstruation, or the menses. The first menses after puberty, called menarche, can occur either
before or after the first ovulation.
The Menstrual Cycle
Now that we have discussed the maturation of the cohort of tertiary follicles in the ovary, the build-up and then
shedding of the endometrial lining in the uterus, and the function of the uterine tubes and vagina, we can put
everything together to talk about the three phases of the menstrual cycle—the series of changes in which the
uterine lining is shed, rebuilds, and prepares for implantation.
The timing of the menstrual cycle starts with the first day of menses, referred to as day one of a period. Cycle length
is determined by counting the days between the onset of bleeding in two subsequent cycles. Because the average
length of a menstrual cycle is 28 days, this is the time period used to identify the timing of events in the cycle.
However, the length of the menstrual cycle varies, and even in the same person from one cycle to the next, typically
from 21 to 32 days.
Just as the hormones produced by the granulosa and theca cells of the ovary “drive” the follicular and luteal phases
of the ovarian cycle, they also control the three distinct phases of the menstrual cycle. These are the menses phase,
the proliferative phase, and the secretory phase.
Menses Phase
The menses phase of the menstrual cycle is the phase during which the lining is shed; that is, the days that the
person menstruates. Although it averages approximately five days, the menses phase can last from 2 to 7 days, or
longer. As shown in Figure 27.15, the menses phase occurs during the early days of the follicular phase of the
ovarian cycle, when progesterone, FSH, and LH levels are low. Recall that progesterone concentrations decline as a
result of the degradation of the corpus luteum, marking the end of the luteal phase. This decline in progesterone
triggers the shedding of the stratum functionalis of the endometrium.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1207
FIGURE 27.15
Hormone Levels in Ovarian and Menstrual Cycles
The correlation of the hormone levels and their effects on the
female reproductive system is shown in this timeline of the ovarian and menstrual cycles. The menstrual cycle begins at day one with the
start of menses. Ovulation occurs around day 14 of a 28-day cycle, triggered by the LH surge.
1208
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Proliferative Phase
Once menstrual flow ceases, the endometrium begins to proliferate again, marking the beginning of the
proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle (see Figure 27.15). It occurs when the granulosa and theca cells of the
tertiary follicles begin to produce increased amounts of estrogen. These rising estrogen concentrations stimulate
the endometrial lining to rebuild.
Recall that the high estrogen concentrations will eventually lead to a decrease in FSH as a result of negative
feedback, resulting in atresia of all but one of the developing tertiary follicles. The switch to positive
feedback—which occurs with the elevated estrogen production from the dominant follicle—then stimulates the LH
surge that will trigger ovulation. In a typical 28-day menstrual cycle, ovulation occurs on day 14. Ovulation marks
the end of the proliferative phase as well as the end of the follicular phase.
Secretory Phase
In addition to prompting the LH surge, high estrogen levels increase the uterine tube contractions that facilitate the
pick-up and transfer of the ovulated oocyte. High estrogen levels also slightly decrease the acidity of the vagina,
making it more hospitable to sperm. In the ovary, the luteinization of the granulosa cells of the collapsed follicle
forms the progesterone-producing corpus luteum, marking the beginning of the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle. In
the uterus, progesterone from the corpus luteum begins the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle, in which the
endometrial lining prepares for implantation (see Figure 27.15). Over the next 10 to 12 days, the endometrial glands
secrete a fluid rich in glycogen. If fertilization has occurred, this fluid will nourish the ball of cells now developing
from the zygote. At the same time, the spiral arteries develop to provide blood to the thickened stratum functionalis.
If no pregnancy occurs within approximately 10 to 12 days, the corpus luteum will degrade into the corpus albicans.
Levels of both estrogen and progesterone will fall, and the endometrium will grow thinner. Prostaglandins will be
secreted that cause constriction of the spiral arteries, reducing oxygen supply. The endometrial tissue will die,
resulting in menses—or the first day of the next cycle.
Disorders of the...
Female Reproductive System
Research over many years has confirmed that cervical cancer is most often caused by a sexually transmitted
infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). There are over 100 related viruses in the HPV family, and the
characteristics of each strain determine the outcome of the infection. In all cases, the virus enters body cells
and uses its own genetic material to take over the host cell’s metabolic machinery and produce more virus
particles.
HPV infections are common in all people. Indeed, a recent study determined that 42.5 percent of females had
HPV at the time of testing. These people ranged in age from 14 to 59 years and differed in race, ethnicity, and
number of sexual partners. Of note, the prevalence of HPV infection was 53.8 percent among females aged 20 to
24 years, the age group with the highest infection rate.
HPV strains are classified as high or low risk according to their potential to cause cancer. Though most HPV
infections do not cause disease, the disruption of normal cellular functions in the low-risk forms of HPV can
cause the human host to develop genital warts. Often, the body is able to clear an HPV infection by normal
immune responses within 2 years. However, the more serious, high-risk infection by certain types of HPV can
result in cancer of the cervix (Figure 27.16). Infection with either of the cancer-causing variants HPV 16 or HPV
18 has been linked to more than 70 percent of all cervical cancer diagnoses. Although even these high-risk HPV
strains can be cleared from the body over time, infections persist in some individuals. If this happens, the HPV
infection can influence the cells of the cervix to develop precancerous changes.
Risk factors for cervical cancer include having unprotected sex; having multiple sexual partners; a first sexual
experience at a younger age, when the cells of the cervix are not fully mature; failure to receive the HPV vaccine;
a compromised immune system; and smoking. The risk of developing cervical cancer is doubled with cigarette
smoking.
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1209
The Breasts
Whereas the breasts are located far from the other female reproductive organs, they are considered accessory
organs of the female reproductive system. The function of the breasts is to supply milk to an infant in a process
called lactation. The external features of the breast include a nipple surrounded by a pigmented areola (Figure
27.17), whose coloration may deepen during pregnancy. The areola is typically circular and can vary in size from 25
to 100 mm in diameter. The areolar region is characterized by small, raised areolar glands that secrete lubricating
fluid during lactation to protect the nipple from chafing. When a baby nurses, or draws milk from the breast, the
entire areolar region is taken into the mouth.
Breast milk is produced by the mammary glands, which are modified sweat glands. The milk itself exits the breast
through the nipple via 15 to 20 lactiferous ducts that open on the surface of the nipple. These lactiferous ducts
each extend to a lactiferous sinus that connects to a glandular lobe within the breast itself that contains groups of
milk-secreting cells in clusters called alveoli (see Figure 27.17). The clusters can change in size depending on the
FIGURE 27.16
Development of Cervical Cancer
In most cases, cells infected with the HPV virus heal on their own. In some cases,
however, the virus continues to spread and becomes an invasive cancer.
When the high-risk types of HPV enter a cell, two viral proteins are used to neutralize proteins that the host cells
use as checkpoints in the cell cycle. The best studied of these proteins is p53. In a normal cell, p53 detects DNA
damage in the cell’s genome and either halts the progression of the cell cycle—allowing time for DNA repair to
occur—or initiates apoptosis. Both of these processes prevent the accumulation of mutations in a cell’s genome.
High-risk HPV can neutralize p53, keeping the cell in a state in which fast growth is possible and impairing
apoptosis, allowing mutations to accumulate in the cellular DNA.
The prevalence of cervical cancer in the United States is very low because of regular screening exams called pap
smears. Pap smears sample cells of the cervix, allowing the detection of abnormal cells. If pre-cancerous cells
are detected, there are several highly effective techniques that are currently in use to remove them before they
pose a danger. However, people in lower-income countries often do not have access to regular pap smears. As a
result, these females in lower-income countries account for as many as 80 percent of the cases of cervical
cancer worldwide.
In 2006, the first vaccine against the high-risk types of HPV was approved. There are now two HPV vaccines
available: Gardasil® and Cervarix®. Whereas these vaccines were initially only targeted for females, because HPV
is sexually transmitted, all people require vaccination for this approach to achieve its maximum efficacy. A
recent study suggests that the HPV vaccine has cut the rates of HPV infection by the four targeted strains at
least in half. Unfortunately, the high cost of manufacturing the vaccine is currently limiting access to many
people worldwide.
1210
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
amount of milk in the alveolar lumen. Once milk is made in the alveoli, stimulated myoepithelial cells that surround
the alveoli contract to push the milk to the lactiferous sinuses. From here, the baby can draw milk through the
lactiferous ducts by suckling. The lobes themselves are surrounded by fat tissue, which determines the size of the
breast; breast size differs between individuals and does not affect the amount of milk produced. Supporting the
breasts are multiple bands of connective tissue called suspensory ligaments that connect the breast tissue to the
dermis of the overlying skin.
FIGURE 27.17
Anatomy of the Breast
During lactation, milk moves from the alveoli through the lactiferous ducts to the nipple.
During the normal hormonal fluctuations in the menstrual cycle, breast tissue responds to changing levels of
estrogen and progesterone, which can lead to swelling and breast tenderness in some individuals, especially during
the secretory phase. If pregnancy occurs, the increase in hormones leads to further development of the mammary
tissue and enlargement of the breasts.
Hormonal Birth Control
Birth control pills take advantage of the negative feedback system that regulates the ovarian and menstrual cycles
to stop ovulation and prevent pregnancy. Typically they work by providing a constant level of both estrogen and
progesterone, which negatively feeds back onto the hypothalamus and pituitary, thus preventing the release of FSH
and LH. Without FSH, the follicles do not mature, and without the LH surge, ovulation does not occur. Although the
estrogen in birth control pills does stimulate some thickening of the endometrial wall, it is reduced compared with a
normal cycle and is less likely to support implantation.
Some birth control pills contain 21 active pills containing hormones, and 7 inactive pills (placebos). The decline in
hormones during the week that the person takes the placebo pills triggers menses, although it is typically lighter
than a normal menstrual flow because of the reduced endometrial thickening. Newer types of birth control pills have
been developed that deliver low-dose estrogens and progesterone for the entire cycle (these are meant to be taken
365 days a year), and menses never occurs. While some people prefer to have the proof of a lack of pregnancy that a
monthly period provides, menstruation every 28 days is not required for health reasons, and there are no reported
adverse effects of not having a menstrual period in an otherwise healthy individual.
Because birth control pills function by providing constant estrogen and progesterone levels and disrupting negative
feedback, skipping even just one or two pills at certain points of the cycle (or even being several hours late taking
the pill) can lead to an increase in FSH and LH and result in ovulation. It is important, therefore, to follow the
directions on the birth control pill package to successfully prevent pregnancy.
Aging and the...
Female Reproductive System
Female fertility (the ability to conceive) peaks when people are in their twenties, and is slowly reduced until 35
years of age. After that time, fertility declines more rapidly, until it ends completely at the end of menopause.
Menopause is the cessation of the menstrual cycle that occurs as a result of the loss of ovarian follicles and the
27.2 • Anatomy and Physiology of the Ovarian Reproductive System
1211
27.3 Development of the Male and Female Reproductive Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how bipotential tissues are directed to develop into male or female sex organs
•
Name the rudimentary duct systems in the embryo that are precursors to male or female internal sex organs
•
Describe the hormonal changes that bring about puberty, and the secondary sex characteristics
The development of the reproductive systems begins soon after fertilization of the egg, with primordial gonads
beginning to develop approximately one month after conception. Reproductive development continues in utero, but
hormones that they produce. Menopause is considered complete if an individual has not menstruated in a full
year. After that point, they are considered postmenopausal. The average age for this change is consistent
worldwide at between 50 and 52 years of age, but it can normally occur at any time in a person's forties or
fifties. Poor health, including smoking, can lead to earlier loss of fertility and earlier menopause.
As the age of menopause approaches, depletion of the number of viable follicles in the ovaries due to atresia
affects the hormonal regulation of the menstrual cycle. During the years leading up to menopause, there is a
decrease in the levels of the hormone inhibin, which normally participates in a negative feedback loop to the
pituitary to control the production of FSH. The menopausal decrease in inhibin leads to an increase in FSH. The
presence of FSH stimulates more follicles to grow and secrete estrogen. Because small, secondary follicles also
respond to increases in FSH levels, larger numbers of follicles are stimulated to grow; however, most undergo
atresia and die. Eventually, this process leads to the depletion of all follicles in the ovaries, and the production of
estrogen falls off dramatically. It is primarily the lack of estrogens that leads to the symptoms of menopause.
The earliest changes occur during the menopausal transition, often referred to as peri-menopause, when a
mestrual cycle becomes irregular but does not stop entirely. Although the levels of estrogen are still nearly the
same as before the transition, the level of progesterone produced by the corpus luteum is reduced. This decline
in progesterone can lead to abnormal growth, or hyperplasia, of the endometrium. This condition is a concern
because it increases the risk of developing endometrial cancer. Two harmless conditions that can develop during
the transition are uterine fibroids, which are benign masses of cells, and irregular bleeding. As estrogen levels
change, other symptoms that occur are hot flashes and night sweats, trouble sleeping, vaginal dryness, mood
swings, difficulty focusing, and thinning of hair on the head along with the growth of more hair on the face.
Depending on the individual, these symptoms can be entirely absent, moderate, or severe.
After menopause, lower amounts of estrogens can lead to other changes. Cardiovascular disease becomes as
prevalent in females as in males, possibly because estrogens reduce the amount of cholesterol in the blood
vessels. When estrogen is lacking, many people find that they suddenly have problems with high cholesterol and
the cardiovascular issues that accompany it. Osteoporosis is another problem because bone density decreases
rapidly in the first years after menopause. The reduction in bone density leads to a higher incidence of fractures.
Hormone therapy (HT), which employs medication (synthetic estrogens and progestins) to increase estrogen
and progestin levels, can alleviate some of the symptoms of menopause. In 2002, the Women’s Health Initiative
began a study to observe for the long-term outcomes of hormone replacement therapy over 8.5 years. However,
the study was prematurely terminated after 5.2 years because of evidence of a higher than normal risk of breast
cancer in patients taking estrogen-only HT. The potential positive effects on cardiovascular disease were also
not realized in the estrogen-only patients. The results of other hormone replacement studies over the last 50
years, including a 2012 study that followed over 1,000 menopausal women for 10 years, have shown
cardiovascular benefits from estrogen and no increased risk for cancer. Some researchers believe that the age
group tested in the 2002 trial may have been too old to benefit from the therapy, thus skewing the results. In the
meantime, intense debate and study of the benefits and risks of replacement therapy is ongoing. Current
guidelines approve HT for the reduction of hot flashes or flushes, but this treatment is generally only considered
when people first start showing signs of menopausal changes, is used in the lowest dose possible for the
shortest time possible (5 years or less), and it is suggested that people on HT have regular pelvic and breast
exams.
1212
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
there is little change in the reproductive system between infancy and puberty.
Development of the Sexual Organs in the Embryo and Fetus
Mammalian sex determination is generally determined by X and Y chromosomes. Individuals homozygous for X (XX)
are female in sex and heterozygous individuals (XY) are male. The presence of a Y chromosome triggers the
development of a certain set of male characteristics and its absence results in female characteristics.
Nondisjunction during meiosis can produce other combinations such as XXY, XYY, and XO which are called
chromosomal intersex.
Without much chemical prompting, all fertilized eggs would develop into females. To become a male, an individual
must be exposed to the cascade of factors initiated by a single gene on the male Y chromosome. This is called the
SRY (Sex-determining Region of the Y chromosome). Because females do not have a Y chromosome, they do not
have the SRY gene. Without a functional SRY gene, an individual will be female.
In both male and female embryos, the same group of cells has the potential to develop into either the male or
female gonads; this tissue is considered bipotential. The SRY gene actively recruits other genes that begin to
develop the testes, and suppresses genes that are important in female development. As part of this SRY-prompted
cascade, germ cells in the bipotential gonads differentiate into spermatogonia. Without SRY, different genes are
expressed, oogonia form, and primordial follicles develop in the primitive ovary.
Soon after the formation of the testis, the Leydig cells begin to secrete testosterone. Testosterone can influence
tissues that are bipotential to become male reproductive structures. For example, with exposure to testosterone,
cells that could become either the glans penis or the glans clitoris form the glans penis. Without testosterone, these
same cells differentiate into the clitoris.
Not all tissues in the reproductive tract are bipotential. The internal reproductive structures (for example the uterus,
uterine tubes, and part of the vagina in females; and the epididymis, ductus deferens, and seminal vesicles in males)
form from one of two rudimentary duct systems in the embryo. For typical reproductive function in the adult, one set
of these ducts must develop properly, and the other must degrade. In males, secretions from sustentacular cells
trigger a degradation of the female duct, called the Müllerian duct. At the same time, testosterone secretion
stimulates growth of the male tract, the Wolffian duct. Without such sustentacular cell secretion, the Müllerian duct
will develop; without testosterone, the Wolffian duct will degrade. Thus, the developing offspring will be female. For
more information and a figure of differentiation of the gonads, seek additional content on fetal development.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Interactive Link Feature
The different genitalia of fetuses develop from the same tissues in the embryo. View this animation
(http://openstax.org/l/fetus) to see a comparison of the development of structures of the ovarian and testicular
reproductive systems in a growing fetus. Where are the testes located for most of gestational time?
Further Sexual Development Occurs at Puberty
Puberty is the stage of development at which individuals become sexually mature. Though the outcomes of puberty
for different sexes are very different, the hormonal control of the process is very similar. In addition, though the
timing of these events varies between individuals, the sequence of changes that occur is predictable for male and
female adolescents. As shown in Figure 27.18, a concerted release of hormones from the hypothalamus (GnRH), the
anterior pituitary (LH and FSH), and the gonads (either testosterone or estrogen) is responsible for the maturation of
the reproductive systems and the development of secondary sex characteristics, which are physical changes that
serve auxiliary roles in reproduction.
The first changes begin around the age of eight or nine when the production of LH becomes detectable. The release
of LH occurs primarily at night during sleep and precedes the physical changes of puberty by several years. In pre-
pubertal children, the sensitivity of the negative feedback system in the hypothalamus and pituitary is very high.
This means that very low concentrations of androgens or estrogens will negatively feed back onto the hypothalamus
and pituitary, keeping the production of GnRH, LH, and FSH low.
27.3 • Development of the Male and Female Reproductive Systems
1213
As an individual approaches puberty, two changes in sensitivity occur. The first is a decrease of sensitivity in the
hypothalamus and pituitary to negative feedback, meaning that it takes increasingly larger concentrations of sex
steroid hormones to stop the production of LH and FSH. The second change in sensitivity is an increase in sensitivity
of the gonads to the FSH and LH signals, meaning the gonads of adults are more responsive to gonadotropins than
are the gonads of children. As a result of these two changes, the levels of LH and FSH slowly increase and lead to
the enlargement and maturation of the gonads, which in turn leads to secretion of higher levels of sex hormones and
the initiation of spermatogenesis and folliculogenesis.
In addition to age, multiple factors can affect the age of onset of puberty, including genetics, environment, and
psychological stress. One of the more important influences may be nutrition; historical data demonstrate the effect
of better and more consistent nutrition on the age of menarche in the United States, which decreased from an
average age of approximately 17 years of age in 1860 to the current age of approximately 12.75 years in 1960, as it
remains today. Some studies indicate a link between puberty onset and the amount of stored fat in an individual.
This effect is more pronounced in females, but has been documented in both sexes. Body fat, corresponding with
secretion of the hormone leptin by adipose cells, appears to have a strong role in determining menarche. This may
reflect to some extent the high metabolic costs of gestation and lactation. In females who are extremely lean and
highly active, such as gymnasts, there is often a delay in the onset of puberty.
FIGURE 27.18
Hormones of Puberty
During puberty, the release of LH and FSH from the anterior pituitary stimulates the gonads to
produce sex hormones in both male and female adolescents.
Signs of Puberty
Different sex steroid hormone concentrations between the sexes also contribute to the development and function of
secondary sexual characteristics. Examples of secondary sexual characteristics are listed in Table 27.1.
1214
27 • The Reproductive System
Access for free at openstax.org
Development of the Secondary Sexual Characteristics
Male
Female
Increased larynx size and deepening of the voice
Deposition of fat, predominantly in breasts and
hips
Increased muscular development
Breast development
Growth of facial, axillary, and pubic hair, and increased
growth of body hair
Broadening of the pelvis and growth of axillary
and pubic hair
TABLE 27.1
As a female reaches puberty, typically the first change that is visible is the development of the breast tissue. This is
followed by the growth of axillary and pubic hair. A growth spurt normally starts at approximately age 9 to 11, and
may last two years or more. During this time, height can increase 3 inches a year. The next step in puberty is
menarche, the start of menstruation.
In males, the growth of the testes is typically the first physical sign of the beginning of puberty, which is followed by
growth and pigmentation of the scrotum and growth of the penis. The next step is the growth of hair, including
armpit, pubic, chest, and facial hair. Testosterone stimulates the growth of the larynx and thickening and
lengthening of the vocal folds, which causes the voice to drop in pitch. The first fertile ejaculations typically appear
at approximately 15 years of age, but this age can vary widely across individuals. Unlike the early growth spurt
observed in females, the male growth spurt occurs toward the end of puberty, at approximately age 11 to 13, and
height can increase as much as 4 inches a year. In some males, pubertal development can continue through the
early 20s.
27.3 • Development of the Male and Female Reproductive Systems
1215
Key Terms
alveoli
(of the breast) milk-secreting cells in the
mammary gland
ampulla
(of the uterine tube) middle portion of the
uterine tube in which fertilization often occurs
antrum
fluid-filled chamber that characterizes a
mature tertiary (antral) follicle
areola
highly pigmented, circular area surrounding
the raised nipple and containing areolar glands that
secrete fluid important for lubrication during
suckling
Bartholin’s glands
(also, greater vestibular glands)
glands that produce a thick mucus that maintains
moisture in the vulva area; also referred to as the
greater vestibular glands
blood–testis barrier
tight junctions between Sertoli
cells that prevent bloodborne pathogens from
gaining access to later stages of spermatogenesis
and prevent the potential for an autoimmune
reaction to haploid sperm
body of uterus
middle section of the uterus
broad ligament
wide ligament that supports the
uterus by attaching laterally to both sides of the
uterus and pelvic wall
bulbourethral glands
(also, Cowper’s glands) glands
that secrete a lubricating mucus that cleans and
lubricates the urethra prior to and during ejaculation
cervix
elongate inferior end of the uterus where it
connects to the vagina
clitoris
(also, glans clitoris) nerve-rich area of the
vulva that contributes to sexual sensation during
intercourse
corpus albicans
nonfunctional structure remaining in
the ovarian stroma following structural and
functional regression of the corpus luteum
corpus cavernosum
either of two columns of erectile
tissue in the penis that fill with blood during an
erection
corpus luteum
transformed follicle after ovulation
that secretes progesterone
corpus spongiosum
(plural = corpora cavernosa)
column of erectile tissue in the penis that fills with
blood during an erection and surrounds the penile
urethra on the ventral portion of the penis
ductus deferens
(also, vas deferens) duct that
transports sperm from the epididymis through the
spermatic cord and into the ejaculatory duct; also
referred as the vas deferens
ejaculatory duct
duct that connects the ampulla of
the ductus deferens with the duct of the seminal
vesicle at the prostatic urethra
endometrium
inner lining of the uterus, part of which
builds up during the secretory phase of the
menstrual cycle and then sheds with menses
epididymis
(plural = epididymides) coiled tubular
structure in which sperm start to mature and are
stored until ejaculation
fimbriae
fingerlike projections on the distal uterine
tubes
follicle
ovarian structure of one oocyte and
surrounding granulosa (and later theca) cells
folliculogenesis
development of ovarian follicles
from primordial to tertiary under the stimulation of
gonadotropins
fundus
(of the uterus) domed portion of the uterus
that is superior to the uterine tubes
gamete
haploid reproductive cell that contributes
genetic material to form an offspring
glans penis
bulbous end of the penis that contains a
large number of nerve endings
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
hormone
released by the hypothalamus that regulates the
production of follicle-stimulating hormone and
luteinizing hormone from the pituitary gland
gonads
reproductive organs (testes and ovaries) that
produce gametes and reproductive hormones
granulosa cells
supportive cells in the ovarian follicle
that produce estrogen
hymen
membrane that covers part of the opening of
the vagina
infundibulum
(of the uterine tube) wide, distal
portion of the uterine tube terminating in fimbriae
inguinal canal
opening in abdominal wall that
connects the testes to the abdominal cavity
isthmus
narrow, medial portion of the uterine tube
that joins the uterus
labia majora
hair-covered folds of skin located
behind the mons pubis
labia minora
thin, pigmented, hairless flaps of skin
located medial and deep to the labia majora
lactiferous ducts
ducts that connect the mammary
glands to the nipple and allow for the transport of
milk
lactiferous sinus
area of milk collection between
alveoli and lactiferous duct
Leydig cells
cells between the seminiferous tubules
of the testes that produce testosterone; a type of
interstitial cell
mammary glands
glands inside the breast that
secrete milk
menarche
first menstruation in a pubertal female
menses
shedding of the inner portion of the
endometrium out though the vagina; also referred to
as menstruation
menses phase
phase of the menstrual cycle in which
1216
27 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
the endometrial lining is shed
menstrual cycle
approximately 28-day cycle of
changes in the uterus consisting of a menses phase,
a proliferative phase, and a secretory phase
mons pubis
mound of fatty tissue located at the front
of the vulva
Müllerian duct
duct system present in the embryo
that will eventually form the internal female
reproductive structures
myometrium
smooth muscle layer of uterus that
allows for uterine contractions during labor and
expulsion of menstrual blood
oocyte
cell that results from the division of the
oogonium and undergoes meiosis I at the LH surge
and meiosis II at fertilization to become a haploid
ovum
oogenesis
process by which oogonia divide by
mitosis to primary oocytes, which undergo meiosis
to produce the secondary oocyte and, upon
fertilization, the ovum
oogonia
ovarian stem cells that undergo mitosis
during female fetal development to form primary
oocytes
ovarian cycle
approximately 28-day cycle of changes
in the ovary consisting of a follicular phase and a
luteal phase
ovaries
female gonads that produce oocytes and sex
steroid hormones (notably estrogen and
progesterone)
ovulation
release of a secondary oocyte and
associated granulosa cells from an ovary
ovum
haploid female gamete resulting from
completion of meiosis II at fertilization
penis
male organ of copulation
perimetrium
outer epithelial layer of uterine wall
polar body
smaller cell produced during the process
of meiosis in oogenesis
prepuce
(also, foreskin) flap of skin that forms a
collar around, and thus protects and lubricates, the
glans penis; also referred as the foreskin
primary follicles
ovarian follicles with a primary
oocyte and one layer of cuboidal granulosa cells
primordial follicles
least developed ovarian follicles
that consist of a single oocyte and a single layer of
flat (squamous) granulosa cells
proliferative phase
phase of the menstrual cycle in
which the endometrium proliferates
prostate gland
doughnut-shaped gland at the base of
the bladder surrounding the urethra and
contributing fluid to semen during ejaculation
puberty
life stage during which a male or female
adolescent becomes anatomically and
physiologically capable of reproduction
rugae
(of the vagina) folds of skin in the vagina that
allow it to stretch during intercourse and childbirth
scrotum
external pouch of skin and muscle that
houses the testes
secondary follicles
ovarian follicles with a primary
oocyte and multiple layers of granulosa cells
secondary sex characteristics
physical
characteristics that are influenced by sex steroid
hormones and have supporting roles in reproductive
function
secretory phase
phase of the menstrual cycle in
which the endometrium secretes a nutrient-rich
fluid in preparation for implantation of an embryo
semen
ejaculatory fluid composed of sperm and
secretions from the seminal vesicles, prostate, and
bulbourethral glands
seminal vesicle
gland that produces seminal fluid,
which contributes to semen
seminiferous tubules
tube structures within the
testes where spermatogenesis occurs
Sertoli cells
cells that support germ cells through the
process of spermatogenesis; a type of sustentacular
cell
sperm
(also, spermatozoon) male gamete
spermatic cord
bundle of nerves and blood vessels
that supplies the testes; contains ductus deferens
spermatid
immature sperm cells produced by
meiosis II of secondary spermatocytes
spermatocyte
cell that results from the division of
spermatogonium and undergoes meiosis I and
meiosis II to form spermatids
spermatogenesis
formation of new sperm, occurs in
the seminiferous tubules of the testes
spermatogonia
(singular = spermatogonium) diploid
precursor cells that become sperm
spermiogenesis
transformation of spermatids to
spermatozoa during spermatogenesis
suspensory ligaments
bands of connective tissue
that suspend the breast onto the chest wall by
attachment to the overlying dermis
tertiary follicles
(also, antral follicles) ovarian
follicles with a primary or secondary oocyte,
multiple layers of granulosa cells, and a fully formed
antrum
testes
(singular = testis) male gonads
theca cells
estrogen-producing cells in a maturing
ovarian follicle
uterine tubes
(also, fallopian tubes or oviducts) ducts
that facilitate transport of an ovulated oocyte to the
uterus
uterus
muscular hollow organ in which a fertilized
egg develops into a fetus
vagina
tunnel-like organ that provides access to the
27 • Key Terms
1217
uterus for the insertion of semen and from the
uterus for the birth of a baby
vulva
external female genitalia
Wolffian duct
duct system present in the embryo
that will eventually form the internal male
reproductive structures
Chapter Review
27.1 Anatomy and Physiology of the
Testicular Reproductive System
Gametes are the reproductive cells that combine to
form offspring. Organs called gonads produce the
gametes, along with the hormones that regulate
human reproduction. The male gametes are called
sperm. Spermatogenesis, the production of sperm,
occurs within the seminiferous tubules that make up
most of the testis. The scrotum is the muscular sac that
holds the testes outside of the body cavity.
Spermatogenesis begins with mitotic division of
spermatogonia (stem cells) to produce primary
spermatocytes that undergo the two divisions of
meiosis to become secondary spermatocytes, then the
haploid spermatids. During spermiogenesis,
spermatids are transformed into spermatozoa (formed
sperm). Upon release from the seminiferous tubules,
sperm are moved to the epididymis where they
continue to mature. During ejaculation, sperm exit the
epididymis through the ductus deferens, a duct in the
spermatic cord that leaves the scrotum. The ampulla of
the ductus deferens meets the seminal vesicle, a gland
that contributes fructose and proteins, at the
ejaculatory duct. The fluid continues through the
prostatic urethra, where secretions from the prostate
are added to form semen. These secretions help the
sperm to travel through the urethra and into the female
reproductive tract. Secretions from the bulbourethral
glands protect sperm and cleanse and lubricate the
penile (spongy) urethra.
The penis is the male organ of copulation. Columns of
erectile tissue called the corpora cavernosa and corpus
spongiosum fill with blood when sexual arousal
activates vasodilatation in the blood vessels of the
penis. Testosterone regulates and maintains the sex
organs and sex drive, and induces the physical changes
of puberty. Interplay between the testes and the
endocrine system precisely control the production of
testosterone with a negative feedback loop.
27.2 Anatomy and Physiology of the
Ovarian Reproductive System
The external female genitalia are collectively called the
vulva. The vagina is the pathway into and out of the
uterus. The penis is inserted into the vagina to deliver
sperm, and the baby exits the uterus through the
vagina during childbirth.
The ovaries produce oocytes, the female gametes, in a
process called oogenesis. As with spermatogenesis,
meiosis produces the haploid gamete (in this case, an
ovum); however, it is completed only in an oocyte that
has been penetrated by a sperm. In the ovary, an
oocyte surrounded by supporting cells is called a
follicle. In folliculogenesis, primordial follicles develop
into primary, secondary, and tertiary follicles. Early
tertiary follicles with their fluid-filled antrum will be
stimulated by an increase in FSH, a gonadotropin
produced by the anterior pituitary, to grow in the
28-day ovarian cycle. Supporting granulosa and theca
cells in the growing follicles produce estrogens, until
the level of estrogen in the bloodstream is high enough
that it triggers negative feedback at the hypothalamus
and pituitary. This results in a reduction of FSH and LH,
and most tertiary follicles in the ovary undergo atresia
(they die). One follicle, usually the one with the most
FSH receptors, survives this period and is now called
the dominant follicle. The dominant follicle produces
more estrogen, triggering positive feedback and the LH
surge that will induce ovulation. Following ovulation,
the granulosa cells of the empty follicle luteinize and
transform into the progesterone-producing corpus
luteum. The ovulated oocyte with its surrounding
granulosa cells is picked up by the infundibulum of the
uterine tube, and beating cilia help to transport it
through the tube toward the uterus. Fertilization occurs
within the uterine tube, and the final stage of meiosis is
completed.
The uterus has three regions: the fundus, the body, and
the cervix. It has three layers: the outer perimetrium,
the muscular myometrium, and the inner
endometrium. The endometrium responds to estrogen
released by the follicles during the menstrual cycle and
grows thicker with an increase in blood vessels in
preparation for pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized,
no signal is sent to extend the life of the corpus luteum,
and it degrades, stopping progesterone production.
This decline in progesterone results in the sloughing of
the inner portion of the endometrium in a process
called menses, or menstruation.
The breasts are accessory organs that may be utilized
after the birth of a child to produce milk in a process
called lactation. Birth control pills provide constant
levels of estrogen and progesterone to negatively feed
1218
27 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
back on the hypothalamus and pituitary, and suppress
the release of FSH and LH, which inhibits ovulation and
prevents pregnancy.
27.3 Development of the Male and Female
Reproductive Systems
The reproductive systems of males and females begin
to develop soon after conception. A gene on the Y
chromosome called SRY is critical in stimulating a
cascade of events that simultaneously stimulate testis
development and repress the development of female
structures. Testosterone produced by Leydig cells in
the embryonic testis stimulates the development of
male sexual organs. If testosterone is not present,
female sexual organs will develop.
Whereas the gonads and some other reproductive
tissues are considered bipotential, the tissue that
forms the internal reproductive structures stems from
ducts that will develop into only male (Wolffian) or
female (Müllerian) structures. To be able to reproduce
as an adult, one of these systems must develop
properly and the other must degrade.
Further development of the reproductive systems
occurs at puberty. The initiation of the changes that
occur in puberty is the result of a decrease in
sensitivity to negative feedback in the hypothalamus
and pituitary gland, and an increase in sensitivity of the
gonads to FSH and LH stimulation. These changes lead
to increases in either estrogen or testosterone. The
increase in sex steroid hormones leads to maturation
of the gonads and other reproductive organs. The
initiation of spermatogenesis begins, as well as
ovulation and menstruation. Increases in sex steroid
hormones also lead to the development of secondary
sex characteristics.
Interactive Link Questions
1. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/vasectomy)
to learn about vasectomy. As described in this
video, a vasectomy is a procedure in which a small
section of the ductus (vas) deferens is removed
from the scrotum. This interrupts the path taken by
sperm through the ductus deferens. If sperm do not
exit through the vas, either because the person has
had a vasectomy or has not ejaculated, in what
region of the testis do they remain?
2. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/spermpath)
to explore the structures of the male reproductive
system and the path of sperm that starts in the
testes and ends as the sperm leave the penis
through the urethra. Where are sperm deposited
after they leave the ejaculatory duct?
3. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ovulation) to
observe ovulation and its initiation in response to
the release of FSH and LH from the pituitary gland.
What specialized structures help guide the oocyte
from the ovary into the uterine tube?
4. Watch this series of videos (http://openstax.org/l/
oocyte) to look at the movement of the oocyte
through the ovary. The cilia in the uterine tube
promote movement of the oocyte. What would
likely occur if the cilia were paralyzed at the time of
ovulation?
5. The different genitalia of fetuses develop from the
same tissues in the embryo. View this animation
(http://openstax.org/l/fetus) that compares the
development of structures of the female and male
reproductive systems in a growing fetus. Where are
the testes located for most of gestational time?
Review Questions
6. What are male gametes called?
a.
ova
b.
sperm
c.
testes
d.
testosterone
7. Leydig cells ________.
a.
secrete testosterone
b.
activate the sperm flagellum
c.
support spermatogenesis
d.
secrete seminal fluid
8. Which hypothalamic hormone contributes to the
regulation of the male reproductive system?
a.
luteinizing hormone
b.
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
c.
follicle-stimulating hormone
d.
androgens
9. What is the function of the epididymis?
a.
sperm maturation and storage
b.
produces the bulk of seminal fluid
c.
provides nitric oxide needed for erections
d.
spermatogenesis
27 • Interactive Link Questions
1219
10. Spermatogenesis takes place in the ________.
a.
prostate gland
b.
glans penis
c.
seminiferous tubules
d.
ejaculatory duct
11. What are the female gonads called?
a.
oocytes
b.
ova
c.
oviducts
d.
ovaries
12. When do the oogonia undergo mitosis?
a.
before birth
b.
at puberty
c.
at the beginning of each menstrual cycle
d.
during fertilization
13. From what structure does the corpus luteum
originate?
a.
uterine corpus
b.
dominant follicle
c.
fallopian tube
d.
corpus albicans
14. Where does fertilization of the egg by the sperm
typically occur?
a.
vagina
b.
uterus
c.
uterine tube
d.
ovary
15. Why do estrogen levels fall after menopause?
a.
The ovaries degrade.
b.
There are no follicles left to produce estrogen.
c.
The pituitary secretes a menopause-specific
hormone.
d.
The cells of the endometrium degenerate.
16. The vulva includes the ________.
a.
lactiferous duct, rugae, and hymen
b.
lactiferous duct, endometrium, and
bulbourethral glands
c.
mons pubis, endometrium, and hymen
d.
mons pubis, labia majora, and Bartholin’s
glands
17. What controls whether an embryo will develop
testes or ovaries?
a.
pituitary gland
b.
hypothalamus
c.
Y chromosome
d.
presence or absence of estrogen
18. Without SRY expression, an embryo will develop
________.
a.
male reproductive structures
b.
female reproductive structures
c.
no reproductive structures
d.
male reproductive structures 50 percent of
the time and female reproductive structures
50 percent of the time
19. The timing of puberty can be influenced by which
of the following?
a.
genes
b.
stress
c.
amount of body fat
d.
all of the above
Critical Thinking Questions
20. Briefly explain why mature gametes carry only one
set of chromosomes.
21. What special features are evident in sperm cells
but not in somatic cells, and how do these
specializations function?
22. What do each of the three male accessory glands
contribute to the semen?
23. Describe how penile erection occurs.
24. While anabolic steroids (synthetic testosterone)
bulk up muscles, they can also affect testosterone
production in the testis. Using what you know
about negative feedback, describe what would
happen to testosterone production in the testis if a
male takes large amounts of synthetic
testosterone.
25. Follow the path of ejaculated sperm from the
vagina to the oocyte. Include all structures of the
female reproductive tract that the sperm must
travel through to reach the egg.
26. Identify some differences between meiosis in
males and females.
27. Explain the hormonal regulation of the phases of
the menstrual cycle.
28. Endometriosis is a disease characterized by the
presence of endometrial-like tissue found outside
the uterus—in the uterine tubes, on the ovaries, or
even in the pelvic cavity. Offer a hypothesis as to
why endometriosis increases a woman’s risk of
infertility.
1220
27 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
29. Identify the changes in sensitivity that occur in the
hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads as a person
approaches puberty. Explain how these changes
lead to the increases of sex steroid hormone
secretions that drive many pubertal changes.
30. Explain how the internal female and male
reproductive structures develop from two
different duct systems.
31. Explain what would occur during fetal
development to an XY individual with a mutation
causing a nonfunctional SRY gene.
27 • Critical Thinking Questions
1221
1222
27 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 28
Development and Inheritance
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
•
List and explain the steps involved in fertilization
•
Describe the major events in embryonic development
•
Describe the major events in fetal development
•
Discuss the adaptations of the body to pregnancy
•
Describe the physiologic adjustments that the newborn must make in the first hours of extrauterine life
•
Summarize the physiology of lactation
•
Classify and describe the different patterns of inheritance
In approximately nine months, a single cell—a fertilized egg—develops into a fully formed infant
consisting of trillions of cells with myriad specialized functions. The dramatic changes of fertilization, embryonic
development, and fetal development are followed by remarkable adaptations of the newborn to life outside the
womb. An offspring’s normal development depends upon the appropriate synthesis of structural and functional
proteins. This, in turn, is governed by the genetic material inherited from the egg and sperm, as well as
environmental factors.
28.1 Fertilization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the obstacles that sperm must overcome to reach an oocyte
•
Explain capacitation and its importance in fertilization
•
Summarize the events that occur as a sperm fertilizes an oocyte
Fertilization occurs when a sperm and an oocyte (egg) combine and their nuclei fuse. Because each of these
Figure 28.1
Newborn A single fertilized egg develops over the span of nine months into an infant consisting of trillions of cells and
capable of surviving outside the womb. (credit: “Seattleye”/flickr.com)
reproductive cells is a haploid cell containing half of the genetic material needed to form a human being, their
combination forms a diploid cell. This new single cell, called a zygote, contains all of the genetic material needed to
form a human—half from each biological parent.
Transit of Sperm
Fertilization is a numbers game. During ejaculation, hundreds of millions of sperm (spermatozoa) are released into
the vagina. Almost immediately, millions of these sperm are overcome by the acidity of the vagina (approximately
pH 3.8), and millions more may be blocked from entering the uterus by thick cervical mucus. Of those that do enter,
thousands are destroyed by phagocytic uterine leukocytes. Thus, the race into the uterine tubes, which is the most
typical site for sperm to encounter the oocyte, is reduced to a few thousand contenders. Their journey—thought to
be facilitated by uterine contractions—usually takes from 30 minutes to 2 hours. If the sperm do not encounter an
oocyte immediately, they can survive in the uterine tubes for another 3–5 days. Thus, fertilization can still occur if
intercourse takes place a few days before ovulation. In comparison, an oocyte can survive independently for only
approximately 24 hours following ovulation. Intercourse more than a day after ovulation will therefore usually not
result in fertilization.
During the journey, fluids in the female reproductive tract prepare the sperm for fertilization through a process
called capacitation, or priming. The fluids improve the motility of the spermatozoa. They also deplete cholesterol
molecules embedded in the membrane of the head of the sperm, thinning the membrane in such a way that will
help facilitate the release of the lysosomal (digestive) enzymes needed for the sperm to penetrate the oocyte’s
exterior once contact is made. Sperm must undergo the process of capacitation in order to have the “capacity” to
fertilize an oocyte. If they reach the oocyte before capacitation is complete, they will be unable to penetrate the
oocyte’s thick outer layer of cells.
Contact Between Sperm and Oocyte
Upon ovulation, the oocyte released by the ovary is swept into—and along—the uterine tube. Fertilization must occur
in the distal uterine tube because an unfertilized oocyte cannot survive the 72-hour journey to the uterus. As you
will recall from your study of the oogenesis, this oocyte (specifically a secondary oocyte) is surrounded by two
protective layers. The corona radiata is an outer layer of follicular (granulosa) cells that form around a developing
oocyte in the ovary and remain with it upon ovulation. The underlying zona pellucida (pellucid = “transparent”) is a
transparent, but thick, glycoprotein membrane that surrounds the cell’s plasma membrane.
As it is swept along the distal uterine tube, the oocyte encounters the surviving capacitated sperm, which stream
toward it in response to chemical attractants released by the cells of the corona radiata. To reach the oocyte itself,
the sperm must penetrate the two protective layers. The sperm first burrow through the cells of the corona radiata.
Then, upon contact with the zona pellucida, the sperm bind to receptors in the zona pellucida. This initiates a
process called the acrosomal reaction in which the enzyme-filled “cap” of the sperm, called the acrosome,
releases its stored digestive enzymes. These enzymes clear a path through the zona pellucida that allows sperm to
reach the oocyte. Finally, a single sperm makes contact with sperm-binding receptors on the oocyte’s plasma
membrane (Figure 28.2). The plasma membrane of that sperm then fuses with the oocyte’s plasma membrane, and
the head and mid-piece of the “winning” sperm enter the oocyte interior.
How do sperm penetrate the corona radiata? Some sperm undergo a spontaneous acrosomal reaction, which is an
acrosomal reaction not triggered by contact with the zona pellucida. The digestive enzymes released by this
reaction digest the extracellular matrix of the corona radiata. As you can see, the first sperm to reach the oocyte is
never the one to fertilize it. Rather, hundreds of sperm cells must undergo the acrosomal reaction, each helping to
degrade the corona radiata and zona pellucida until a path is created to allow one sperm to contact and fuse with
the plasma membrane of the oocyte. If you consider the loss of millions of sperm between entry into the vagina and
degradation of the zona pellucida, you can understand why a low sperm count can cause male infertility.
1224
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.2
Sperm and the Process of Fertilization
Before fertilization, hundreds of capacitated sperm must break through the
surrounding corona radiata and zona pellucida so that one can contact and fuse with the oocyte plasma membrane.
When the first sperm fuses with the oocyte, the oocyte deploys two mechanisms to prevent polyspermy, which is
penetration by more than one sperm. This is critical because if more than one sperm were to fertilize the oocyte, the
resulting zygote would be a triploid organism with three sets of chromosomes. This is incompatible with life.
The first mechanism is the fast block, which involves a near instantaneous change in sodium ion permeability upon
binding of the first sperm, depolarizing the oocyte plasma membrane and preventing the fusion of additional sperm
cells. The fast block sets in almost immediately and lasts for about a minute, during which time an influx of calcium
ions following sperm penetration triggers the second mechanism, the slow block. In this process, referred to as the
cortical reaction, cortical granules sitting immediately below the oocyte plasma membrane fuse with the
membrane and release zonal inhibiting proteins and mucopolysaccharides into the space between the plasma
membrane and the zona pellucida. Zonal inhibiting proteins cause the release of any other attached sperm and
destroy the oocyte’s sperm receptors, thus preventing any more sperm from binding. The mucopolysaccharides
then coat the nascent zygote in an impenetrable barrier that, together with hardened zona pellucida, is called a
fertilization membrane.
The Zygote
Recall that at the point of fertilization, the oocyte has not yet completed meiosis; all secondary oocytes remain
arrested in metaphase of meiosis II until fertilization. Only upon fertilization does the oocyte complete meiosis. The
unneeded complement of genetic material that results is stored in a second polar body that is eventually ejected. At
this moment, the oocyte has become an ovum, the female haploid gamete. The two haploid nuclei derived from the
sperm and oocyte and contained within the egg are referred to as pronuclei. They decondense, expand, and
replicate their DNA in preparation for mitosis. The pronuclei then migrate toward each other, their nuclear envelopes
disintegrate, and the male- and female-derived genetic material intermingles. This step completes the process of
fertilization and results in a single-celled diploid zygote with all the genetic instructions it needs to develop into a
human.
Most of the time, a person releases a single egg during an ovulation cycle. However, in approximately 1 percent of
ovulation cycles, two eggs are released and both are fertilized. Two zygotes form, implant, and develop, resulting in
the birth of dizygotic (or fraternal) twins. Because dizygotic twins develop from two eggs fertilized by two sperm,
they are no more identical than siblings born at different times.
28.1 • Fertilization
1225
Much less commonly, a zygote can divide into two separate offspring during early development. This results in the
birth of monozygotic (or identical) twins. Although the zygote can split as early as the two-cell stage, splitting occurs
most commonly during the early blastocyst stage, with roughly 70–100 cells present. These two scenarios are
distinct from each other, in that the twin embryos that separated at the two-cell stage will have individual placentas,
whereas twin embryos that form from separation at the blastocyst stage will share a placenta and a chorionic cavity.
Everyday Connection
In Vitro Fertilization
IVF, which stands for in vitro fertilization, is an assisted reproductive technology. In vitro, which in Latin
translates to “in glass,” refers to a procedure that takes place outside of the body. There are many different
indications for IVF. The procedure is used frequently in supporting LGBTQ people, people using surrogates/
gestational carriers, and also people who have difficulties reproducing. For example, a person may produce
healthy eggs, but the eggs cannot reach the uterus because the uterine tubes are blocked or otherwise
compromised. A person may have a low sperm count, low sperm motility, sperm with an unusually high
percentage of morphological abnormalities, or sperm that are incapable of penetrating the zona pellucida of an
egg.
A typical IVF procedure begins with egg collection. A normal ovulation cycle produces only one oocyte, but the
number can be boosted significantly (to 10–20 oocytes) by administering a short course of gonadotropins. The
course begins with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) analogs, which support the development of multiple
follicles, and ends with a luteinizing hormone (LH) analog that triggers ovulation. Right before the ova would be
released from the ovary, they are harvested using ultrasound-guided oocyte retrieval. In this procedure,
ultrasound allows a physician to visualize mature follicles. The ova are aspirated (sucked out) using a syringe.
In parallel, sperm are obtained from the male partner or from a sperm bank. The sperm are prepared by washing
to remove seminal fluid because seminal fluid contains a peptide, FPP (or, fertilization promoting peptide),
that—in high concentrations—prevents capacitation of the sperm. The sperm sample is also concentrated, to
increase the sperm count per milliliter.
Next, the eggs and sperm are mixed in a petri dish. The ideal ratio is 75,000 sperm to one egg. If there are
severe problems with the sperm—for example, the count is exceedingly low, or the sperm are completely
nonmotile, or incapable of binding to or penetrating the zona pellucida—a sperm can be injected into an egg.
This is called intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).
The embryos are then incubated until they either reach the eight-cell stage or the blastocyst stage. In the United
States, fertilized eggs are typically cultured to the blastocyst stage because this results in a higher pregnancy
rate. Finally, the embryos are transferred to a woman’s uterus using a plastic catheter (tube). Figure 28.3
illustrates the steps involved in IVF.
1226
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
INTERACTIVE LINK
Go to this site (http://openstax.org/l/fertilization) to view resources covering various aspects of fertilization,
including movies and animations showing sperm structure and motility, ovulation, and fertilization.
FIGURE 28.3
IVF
In vitro fertilization involves egg collection from the ovaries, fertilization in a petri dish, and the transfer of
embryos into the uterus.
IVF is a relatively new and still evolving technology, and until recently it was necessary to transfer multiple
embryos to achieve a good chance of a pregnancy. Today, however, transferred embryos are much more likely to
implant successfully, so countries that regulate the IVF industry cap the number of embryos that can be
transferred per cycle at two. This reduces the risk of multiple-birth pregnancies.
The rate of success for IVF is correlated with the age of the gestational carrier (which may be the child's mother
or a surrogate). More than 40 percent of females under 35 succeed in giving birth following IVF, but the rate
drops to a little over 10 percent in females over 40.
28.1 • Fertilization
1227
28.2 Embryonic Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the stages of embryonic development that occur before implantation
•
Describe the process of implantation
•
List and describe four embryonic membranes
•
Explain gastrulation
•
Describe how the placenta is formed and identify its functions
•
Explain how an embryo transforms from a flat disc of cells into a three-dimensional shape resembling a human
•
Summarize the process of organogenesis
Throughout this chapter, we will express embryonic and fetal ages in terms of weeks from fertilization, commonly
called conception. The period of time required for full development of a fetus in utero is referred to as gestation
(gestare = “to carry” or “to bear”). It can be subdivided into distinct gestational periods. The first 2 weeks of
prenatal development are referred to as the pre-embryonic stage. A developing human is referred to as an embryo
during weeks 3–8, and a fetus from the ninth week of gestation until birth. In this section, we’ll cover the pre-
embryonic and embryonic stages of development, which are characterized by cell division, migration, and
differentiation. By the end of the embryonic period, all of the organ systems are structured in rudimentary form,
although the organs themselves are either nonfunctional or only semi-functional.
Pre-implantation Embryonic Development
Following fertilization, the zygote and its associated membranes, together referred to as the conceptus, continue to
be projected toward the uterus by peristalsis and beating cilia of the epithelial cells of the Fallopian tube. During its
journey to the uterus, the zygote undergoes five or six rapid mitotic cell divisions. Although each cleavage results in
more cells, it does not increase the total volume of the conceptus (Figure 28.4). Each daughter cell produced by
cleavage is called a blastomere (blastos = “germ,” in the sense of a seed or sprout).
Approximately 3 days after fertilization, a 16-cell conceptus reaches the uterus. The cells that had been loosely
grouped are now compacted and look more like a solid mass. The name given to this structure is the morula (morula
= “little mulberry”). Once inside the uterus, the conceptus floats freely for several more days. It continues to divide,
creating a ball of approximately 100 cells, and consuming nutritive endometrial secretions called uterine milk while
the uterine lining thickens. The ball of now tightly bound cells starts to secrete fluid and organize themselves around
a fluid-filled cavity, the blastocoel. At this developmental stage, the conceptus is referred to as a blastocyst. Within
this structure, a group of cells forms into an inner cell mass, which is fated to become the embryo. The cells that
form the outer shell are called trophoblasts (trophe = “to feed” or “to nourish”). These cells will develop into the
chorionic sac and the fetal portion of the placenta (the organ of nutrient, waste, and gas exchange between a
pregnant person and the developing offspring).
The inner mass of embryonic cells is totipotent during this stage, meaning that each cell has the potential to
differentiate into any cell type in the human body. Totipotency lasts for only a few days before the cells’ fates are set
as being the precursors to a specific lineage of cells.
1228
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.4
Pre-Embryonic Cleavages
Pre-embryonic cleavages make use of the abundant cytoplasm of the conceptus as the cells
rapidly divide without changing the total volume.
As the blastocyst forms, the trophoblast excretes enzymes that begin to degrade the zona pellucida. In a process
called “hatching,” the conceptus breaks free of the zona pellucida in preparation for implantation.
INTERACTIVE LINK
View this time-lapse movie (http://openstax.org/l/conceptus) of a conceptus starting at day 3. What is the first
structure you see? At what point in the movie does the blastocoel first appear? What event occurs at the end of the
movie?
Implantation
At the end of the first week, the blastocyst comes in contact with the uterine wall and adheres to it, embedding itself
in the uterine lining via the trophoblast cells. Thus begins the process of implantation, which signals the end of the
pre-embryonic stage of development (Figure 28.5). Implantation can be accompanied by minor bleeding. The
blastocyst typically implants in the fundus of the uterus or on the posterior wall. However, if the endometrium is not
fully developed and ready to receive the blastocyst, the blastocyst will detach and find a better spot. A significant
percentage (50–75 percent) of blastocysts fail to implant; when this occurs, the blastocyst is shed with the
endometrium during menses. The high rate of implantation failure is one reason why pregnancy typically requires
several ovulation cycles to achieve.
28.2 • Embryonic Development
1229
FIGURE 28.5
Pre-Embryonic Development
Ovulation, fertilization, pre-embryonic development, and implantation occur at specific
locations within the female reproductive system in a time span of approximately 1 week.
When implantation succeeds and the blastocyst adheres to the endometrium, the superficial cells of the trophoblast
fuse with each other, forming the syncytiotrophoblast, a multinucleated body that digests endometrial cells to
firmly secure the blastocyst to the uterine wall. In response, the uterine mucosa rebuilds itself and envelops the
blastocyst (Figure 28.6). The trophoblast secretes human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a hormone that directs
the corpus luteum to survive, enlarge, and continue producing progesterone and estrogen to suppress menses.
These functions of hCG are necessary for creating an environment suitable for the developing embryo. As a result of
this increased production, hCG accumulates in the maternal bloodstream and is excreted in the urine. Implantation
is complete by the middle of the second week. Just a few days after implantation, the trophoblast has secreted
enough hCG for an at-home urine pregnancy test to give a positive result.
1230
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.6
Implantation
During implantation, the trophoblast cells of the blastocyst adhere to the endometrium and digest
endometrial cells until it is attached securely.
Most of the time an embryo implants within the body of the uterus in a location that can support growth and
development. However, in one to two percent of cases, the embryo implants either outside the uterus (an ectopic
pregnancy) or in a region of uterus that can create complications for the pregnancy. If the embryo implants in the
inferior portion of the uterus, the placenta can potentially grow over the opening of the cervix, a condition call
placenta previa.
Disorders of the...
Development of the Embryo
In the vast majority of ectopic pregnancies, the embryo does not complete its journey to the uterus and implants
in the uterine tube, referred to as a tubal pregnancy. However, there are also ovarian ectopic pregnancies (in
28.2 • Embryonic Development
1231
Embryonic Membranes
During the second week of development, with the embryo implanted in the uterus, cells within the blastocyst start
to organize into layers. Some grow to form the extra-embryonic membranes needed to support and protect the
growing embryo: the amnion, the yolk sac, the allantois, and the chorion.
At the beginning of the second week, the cells of the inner cell mass form into a two-layered disc of embryonic cells,
and a space—the amniotic cavity—opens up between it and the trophoblast (Figure 28.8). Cells from the upper
layer of the disc (the epiblast) extend around the amniotic cavity, creating a membranous sac that forms into the
amnion by the end of the second week. The amnion fills with amniotic fluid and eventually grows to surround the
embryo. Early in development, amniotic fluid consists almost entirely of a filtrate of maternal plasma, but as the
kidneys of the fetus begin to function at approximately the eighth week, they add urine to the volume of amniotic
fluid. Floating within the amniotic fluid, the embryo—and later, the fetus—is protected from trauma and rapid
temperature changes. It can move freely within the fluid and can prepare for swallowing and breathing out of the
uterus.
which the egg never left the ovary) and abdominal ectopic pregnancies (in which an egg was “lost” to the
abdominal cavity during the transfer from ovary to uterine tube, or in which an embryo from a tubal pregnancy
re-implanted in the abdomen). Once in the abdominal cavity, an embryo can implant into any well-vascularized
structure—the rectouterine cavity (Douglas’ pouch), the mesentery of the intestines, and the greater omentum
are some common sites.
Tubal pregnancies can be caused by scar tissue within the tube following a sexually transmitted bacterial
infection. The scar tissue impedes the progress of the embryo into the uterus—in some cases “snagging” the
embryo and, in other cases, blocking the tube completely. Approximately one half of tubal pregnancies resolve
spontaneously. Implantation in a uterine tube causes bleeding, which appears to stimulate smooth muscle
contractions and expulsion of the embryo. In the remaining cases, medical or surgical intervention is necessary.
If an ectopic pregnancy is detected early, the embryo’s development can be arrested by the administration of
the cytotoxic drug methotrexate, which inhibits the metabolism of folic acid. If diagnosis is late and the uterine
tube is already ruptured, surgical repair is essential.
Even if the embryo has successfully found its way to the uterus, it does not always implant in an optimal location
(the fundus or the posterior wall of the uterus). Placenta previa can result if an embryo implants close to the
internal os of the uterus (the internal opening of the cervix). As the fetus grows, the placenta can partially or
completely cover the opening of the cervix (Figure 28.7). Although it occurs in only 0.5 percent of pregnancies,
placenta previa is the leading cause of antepartum hemorrhage (profuse vaginal bleeding after week 24 of
pregnancy but prior to childbirth).
FIGURE 28.7
Placenta Previa
An embryo that implants too close to the opening of the cervix can lead to placenta previa, a
condition in which the placenta partially or completely covers the cervix.
1232
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.8
Development of the Embryonic Disc
Formation of the embryonic disc leaves spaces on either side that develop into the
amniotic cavity and the yolk sac.
On the ventral side of the embryonic disc, opposite the amnion, cells in the lower layer of the embryonic disk (the
hypoblast) extend into the blastocyst cavity and form a yolk sac. The yolk sac supplies some nutrients absorbed
from the trophoblast and also provides primitive blood circulation to the developing embryo for the second and third
week of development. When the placenta takes over nourishing the embryo at approximately week 4, the yolk sac
has been greatly reduced in size and its main function is to serve as the source of blood cells and germ cells (cells
that will give rise to gametes). During week 3, a finger-like outpocketing of the yolk sac develops into the allantois, a
primitive excretory duct of the embryo that will become part of the urinary bladder. Together, the stalks of the yolk
sac and allantois establish the outer structure of the umbilical cord.
The last of the extra-embryonic membranes is the chorion, which is the one membrane that surrounds all others.
The development of the chorion will be discussed in more detail shortly, as it relates to the growth and development
of the placenta.
Embryogenesis
As the third week of development begins, the two-layered disc of cells becomes a three-layered disc through the
process of gastrulation, during which the cells transition from totipotency to multipotency. The embryo, which takes
the shape of an oval-shaped disc, forms an indentation called the primitive streak along the dorsal surface of the
epiblast. A node at the caudal or “tail” end of the primitive streak emits growth factors that direct cells to multiply
and migrate. Cells migrate toward and through the primitive streak and then move laterally to create two new layers
of cells. The first layer is the endoderm, a sheet of cells that displaces the hypoblast and lies adjacent to the yolk
sac. The second layer of cells fills in as the middle layer, or mesoderm. The cells of the epiblast that remain (not
having migrated through the primitive streak) become the ectoderm (Figure 28.9).
28.2 • Embryonic Development
1233
FIGURE 28.9
Germ Layers
Formation of the three primary germ layers occurs during the first 2 weeks of development. The embryo at
this stage is only a few millimeters in length.
Each of these germ layers will develop into specific structures in the embryo. Whereas the ectoderm and endoderm
form tightly connected epithelial sheets, the mesodermal cells are less organized and exist as a loosely connected
cell community. The ectoderm gives rise to cell lineages that differentiate to become the central and peripheral
nervous systems, sensory organs, epidermis, hair, and nails. Mesodermal cells ultimately become the skeleton,
muscles, connective tissue, heart, blood vessels, and kidneys. The endoderm goes on to form the epithelial lining of
the gastrointestinal tract, liver, and pancreas, as well as the lungs (Figure 28.10).
FIGURE 28.10
Fates of Germ Layers in Embryo
Following gastrulation of the embryo in the third week, embryonic cells of the
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm begin to migrate and differentiate into the cell lineages that will give rise to mature organs and organ
systems in the infant.
1234
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
Development of the Placenta
During the first several weeks of development, the cells of the endometrium—referred to as decidual cells—nourish
the nascent embryo. During prenatal weeks 4–12, the developing placenta gradually takes over the role of feeding
the embryo, and the decidual cells are no longer needed. The mature placenta is composed of tissues derived from
the embryo, as well as maternal tissues of the endometrium. The placenta connects to the conceptus via the
umbilical cord, which carries deoxygenated blood and wastes from the fetus through two umbilical arteries;
nutrients and oxygen are carried from the pregnant person to the fetus through the single umbilical vein. The
umbilical cord is surrounded by the amnion, and the spaces within the cord around the blood vessels are filled with
Wharton’s jelly, a mucous connective tissue.
The maternal portion of the placenta develops from the deepest layer of the endometrium, the decidua basalis. To
form the embryonic portion of the placenta, the syncytiotrophoblast and the underlying cells of the trophoblast
(cytotrophoblast cells) begin to proliferate along with a layer of extraembryonic mesoderm cells. These form the
chorionic membrane, which envelops the entire conceptus as the chorion. The chorionic membrane forms finger-
like structures called chorionic villi that burrow into the endometrium like tree roots, making up the fetal portion of
the placenta. The cytotrophoblast cells perforate the chorionic villi, burrow farther into the endometrium, and
remodel maternal blood vessels to augment maternal blood flow surrounding the villi. Meanwhile, fetal
mesenchymal cells derived from the mesoderm fill the villi and differentiate into blood vessels, including the three
umbilical blood vessels that connect the embryo to the developing placenta (Figure 28.11).
FIGURE 28.11
Cross-Section of the Placenta
In the placenta, maternal and fetal blood components are conducted through the
surface of the chorionic villi, but maternal and fetal bloodstreams never mix directly.
The placenta develops throughout the embryonic period and during the first several weeks of the fetal period;
placentation is complete by weeks 14–16. As a fully developed organ, the placenta provides nutrition and
excretion, respiration, and endocrine function (Table 28.1 and Figure 28.12). It receives blood from the fetus
through the umbilical arteries. Capillaries in the chorionic villi filter fetal wastes out of the blood and return clean,
oxygenated blood to the fetus through the umbilical vein. Nutrients and oxygen are transferred from maternal blood
surrounding the villi through the capillaries and into the fetal bloodstream. Some substances move across the
placenta by simple diffusion. Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and any other lipid-soluble substances take this route. Other
substances move across by facilitated diffusion. This includes water-soluble glucose. The fetus has a high demand
for amino acids and iron, and those substances are moved across the placenta by active transport.
Maternal and fetal blood does not commingle because blood cells cannot move across the placenta. This separation
prevents the pregnant person's cytotoxic T cells from reaching and subsequently destroying the fetus, which bears
“non-self” antigens. Further, it ensures the fetal red blood cells do not enter the pregnant person's circulation and
trigger antibody development (if they carry “non-self” antigens)—at least until the final stages of pregnancy or birth.
This is the reason that, even in the absence of preventive treatment, an Rh− person doesn’t develop antibodies that
could cause hemolytic disease in their first Rh+ fetus.
28.2 • Embryonic Development
1235
Although blood cells are not exchanged, the chorionic villi provide ample surface area for the two-way exchange of
substances between maternal and fetal blood. The rate of exchange increases throughout gestation as the villi
become thinner and increasingly branched. The placenta is permeable to lipid-soluble fetotoxic substances:
alcohol, nicotine, barbiturates, antibiotics, certain pathogens, and many other substances that can be dangerous or
fatal to the developing embryo or fetus. For these reasons, pregnant people should avoid fetotoxic substances.
Alcohol consumption by pregnant people, for example, can result in a range of abnormalities referred to as fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD). These include organ and facial malformations, as well as cognitive and
behavioral disorders.
Functions of the Placenta
Nutrition and digestion
Respiration
Endocrine function
•
Mediates diffusion of
maternal glucose, amino
acids, fatty acids, vitamins,
and minerals
•
Stores nutrients during
early pregnancy to
accommodate increased
fetal demand later in
pregnancy
•
Excretes and filters fetal
nitrogenous wastes into
maternal blood
•
Mediates maternal-to-
fetal oxygen transport
and fetal-to-maternal
carbon dioxide transport
•
Secretes several hormones, including hCG,
estrogens, and progesterone, to maintain
the pregnancy and stimulate maternal and
fetal development
•
Mediates the transmission of maternal
hormones into fetal blood and vice versa
TABLE 28.1
FIGURE 28.12
Placenta
This post-expulsion placenta and umbilical cord (white) are viewed from the fetal side.
Organogenesis
Following gastrulation, rudiments of the central nervous system develop from the ectoderm in the process of
neurulation (Figure 28.13). Specialized neuroectodermal tissues along the length of the embryo thicken into the
neural plate. During the fourth week, tissues on either side of the plate fold upward into a neural fold. The two folds
converge to form the neural tube. The tube lies atop a rod-shaped, mesoderm-derived notochord, which eventually
becomes the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral discs. Block-like structures called somites form on either side of
the tube, eventually differentiating into the axial skeleton, skeletal muscle, and dermis. During the fourth and fifth
weeks, the anterior neural tube dilates and subdivides to form vesicles that will become the brain structures.
1236
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
Folate, one of the B vitamins, is important to the healthy development of the neural tube. A deficiency of maternal
folate in the first weeks of pregnancy can result in neural tube defects, including spina bifida—a birth defect in which
spinal tissue protrudes through the newborn’s vertebral column, which has failed to completely close. A more
severe neural tube defect is anencephaly, a partial or complete absence of brain tissue.
FIGURE 28.13
Neurulation
The embryonic process of neurulation establishes the rudiments of the future central nervous system and
skeleton.
The embryo, which begins as a flat sheet of cells, begins to acquire a cylindrical shape through the process of
embryonic folding (Figure 28.14). The embryo folds laterally and again at either end, forming a C-shape with
distinct head and tail ends. The embryo envelops a portion of the yolk sac, which protrudes with the umbilical cord
from what will become the abdomen. The folding essentially creates a tube, called the primitive gut, that is lined by
the endoderm. The amniotic sac, which was sitting on top of the flat embryo, envelops the embryo as it folds.
28.2 • Embryonic Development
1237
FIGURE 28.14
Embryonic Folding
Embryonic folding converts a flat sheet of cells into a hollow, tube-like structure.
Within the first 8 weeks of gestation, a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs
and tissues from the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. This process is called organogenesis.
Like the central nervous system, the heart also begins its development in the embryo as a tube-like structure,
connected via capillaries to the chorionic villi. Cells of the primitive tube-shaped heart are capable of electrical
conduction and contraction. The heart begins beating in the beginning of the fourth week, although it does not
actually pump embryonic blood until a week later, when the oversized liver has begun producing red blood cells.
(This is a temporary responsibility of the embryonic liver that the bone marrow will assume during fetal
development.) During weeks 4–5, the eye pits form, limb buds become apparent, and the rudiments of the
pulmonary system are formed.
During the sixth week, uncontrolled fetal limb movements begin to occur. The gastrointestinal system develops too
rapidly for the embryonic abdomen to accommodate it, and the intestines temporarily loop into the umbilical cord.
Paddle-shaped hands and feet develop fingers and toes by the process of apoptosis (programmed cell death), which
causes the tissues between the fingers to disintegrate. By week 7, the facial structure is more complex and includes
nostrils, outer ears, and lenses (Figure 28.15). By the eighth week, the head is nearly as large as the rest of the
embryo’s body, and all major brain structures are in place. The external genitalia are apparent, but at this point,
male and female embryos are indistinguishable. Bone begins to replace cartilage in the embryonic skeleton through
the process of ossification. By the end of the embryonic period, the embryo is approximately 3 cm (1.2 in) from
crown to rump and weighs approximately 8 g (0.25 oz).
1238
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.15
Embryo at 7 Weeks
An embryo at the end of 7 weeks of development is only 10 mm in length, but its developing eyes,
limb buds, and tail are already visible. (This embryo was derived from an ectopic pregnancy.) (credit: Ed Uthman)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/embryogenesis) to view the process of embryogenesis from fertilization
through pregnancy to birth. Can you identify when neurulation occurs in the embryo?
28.3 Fetal Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Differentiate between the embryonic period and the fetal period
•
Briefly describe the process of sexual differentiation
•
Describe the fetal circulatory system and explain the role of the shunts
•
Trace the development of a fetus from the end of the embryonic period to birth
As you will recall, a developing human is called a fetus from the ninth week of gestation until birth. This 30-week
period of development is marked by continued cell growth and differentiation, which fully develop the structures
and functions of the immature organ systems formed during the embryonic period. The completion of fetal
development results in a newborn who, although still immature in many ways, is capable of survival outside the
womb.
Sexual Differentiation
Sexual differentiation does not begin until the fetal period, during weeks 9–12. Embryonic males and females,
though genetically distinguishable, are morphologically identical (Figure 28.16). Bipotential gonads, or gonads that
can develop into male or female sexual organs, are connected to a central cavity called the cloaca via Müllerian
ducts and Wolffian ducts. (The cloaca is an extension of the primitive gut.) Several events lead to sexual
differentiation during this period.
During male fetal development, the bipotential gonads become the testes and associated epididymis. The Müllerian
ducts degenerate. The Wolffian ducts become the vas deferens, and the cloaca becomes the urethra and rectum.
During female fetal development, the bipotential gonads develop into ovaries. The Wolffian ducts degenerate. The
Müllerian ducts become the uterine tubes and uterus, and the cloaca divides and develops into a vagina, a urethra,
28.3 • Fetal Development
1239
and a rectum.
FIGURE 28.16
Sexual Differentiation
Differentiation of the male and female reproductive systems does not occur until the fetal period
of development.
The Fetal Circulatory System
During prenatal development, the fetal circulatory system is integrated with the placenta via the umbilical cord so
that the fetus receives both oxygen and nutrients from the placenta. However, after childbirth, the umbilical cord is
severed, and the newborn’s circulatory system must be reconfigured. When the heart first forms in the embryo, it
exists as two parallel tubes derived from mesoderm and lined with endothelium, which then fuse together. As the
embryo develops into a fetus, the tube-shaped heart folds and further differentiates into the four chambers present
in a mature heart. Unlike a mature cardiovascular system, however, the fetal cardiovascular system also includes
circulatory shortcuts, or shunts. A shunt is an anatomical (or sometimes surgical) diversion that allows blood flow to
bypass immature organs such as the lungs and liver until childbirth.
1240
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
The placenta provides the fetus with necessary oxygen and nutrients via the umbilical vein. (Remember that veins
carry blood toward the heart. In this case, the blood flowing to the fetal heart is oxygenated because it comes from
the placenta. The respiratory system is immature and cannot yet oxygenate blood on its own.) From the umbilical
vein, the oxygenated blood flows toward the inferior vena cava, all but bypassing the immature liver, via the ductus
venosus shunt (Figure 28.17). The liver receives just a trickle of blood, which is all that it needs in its immature,
semifunctional state. Blood flows from the inferior vena cava to the right atrium, mixing with fetal venous blood
along the way.
Although the fetal liver is semifunctional, the fetal lungs are nonfunctional. The fetal circulation therefore bypasses
the lungs by shifting some of the blood through the foramen ovale, a shunt that directly connects the right and left
atria and avoids the pulmonary trunk altogether. Most of the rest of the blood is pumped to the right ventricle, and
from there, into the pulmonary trunk, which splits into pulmonary arteries. However, a shunt within the pulmonary
artery, the ductus arteriosus, diverts a portion of this blood into the aorta. This ensures that only a small volume of
oxygenated blood passes through the immature pulmonary circuit, which has only minor metabolic requirements.
Blood vessels of uninflated lungs have high resistance to flow, a condition that encourages blood to flow to the
aorta, which presents much lower resistance. The oxygenated blood moves through the foramen ovale into the left
atrium, where it mixes with the now deoxygenated blood returning from the pulmonary circuit. This blood then
moves into the left ventricle, where it is pumped into the aorta. Some of this blood moves through the coronary
arteries into the myocardium, and some moves through the carotid arteries to the brain.
The descending aorta carries partially oxygenated and partially deoxygenated blood into the lower regions of the
body. It eventually passes into the umbilical arteries through branches of the internal iliac arteries. The
deoxygenated blood collects waste as it circulates through the fetal body and returns to the umbilical cord. Thus,
the two umbilical arteries carry blood low in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide and fetal wastes. This blood is
filtered through the placenta, where wastes diffuse into the maternal circulation. Oxygen and nutrients from the
pregnant person diffuse into the placenta and from there into the fetal blood, and the process repeats.
FIGURE 28.17
Fetal Circulatory System
The fetal circulatory system includes three shunts to divert blood from undeveloped and
28.3 • Fetal Development
1241
partially functioning organs, as well as blood supply to and from the placenta.
Other Organ Systems
During weeks 9–12 of fetal development, the brain continues to expand, the body elongates, and ossification
continues. Fetal movements are frequent during this period, but are jerky and not well-controlled. The bone marrow
begins to take over the process of erythrocyte production—a task that the liver performed during the embryonic
period. The liver now secretes bile. The fetus circulates amniotic fluid by swallowing it and producing urine. The
eyes are well-developed by this stage, but the eyelids are fused shut. The fingers and toes begin to develop nails. By
the end of week 12, the fetus measures approximately 9 cm (3.5 in) from crown to rump.
Weeks 13–16 are marked by sensory organ development. The eyes move closer together; blinking motions begin,
although the eyes remain sealed shut. The lips exhibit sucking motions. The ears move upward and lie flatter against
the head. The scalp begins to grow hair. The excretory system is also developing: the kidneys are well-formed, and
meconium, or fetal feces, begins to accumulate in the intestines. Meconium consists of ingested amniotic fluid,
cellular debris, mucus, and bile.
During approximately weeks 16–20, as the fetus grows and limb movements become more powerful, the pregnant
person may begin to feel quickening, or fetal movements. However, space restrictions limit these movements and
typically force the growing fetus into the “fetal position,” with the arms crossed and the legs bent at the knees.
Sebaceous glands coat the skin with a waxy, protective substance called vernix caseosa that protects and
moisturizes the skin and may provide lubrication during childbirth. A silky hair called lanugo also covers the skin
during weeks 17–20, but it is shed as the fetus continues to grow. Extremely premature infants sometimes exhibit
residual lanugo.
Developmental weeks 21–30 are characterized by rapid weight gain, which is important for maintaining a stable
body temperature after birth. The bone marrow completely takes over erythrocyte synthesis, and the axons of the
spinal cord begin to be myelinated, or coated in the electrically insulating glial cell sheaths that are necessary for
efficient nervous system functioning. (The process of myelination is not completed until adolescence.) During this
period, the fetus grows eyelashes. The eyelids are no longer fused and can be opened and closed. The lungs begin
producing surfactant, a substance that reduces surface tension in the lungs and assists proper lung expansion after
birth. Inadequate surfactant production in premature newborns may result in respiratory distress syndrome, and as
a result, the newborn may require surfactant replacement therapy, supplemental oxygen, or maintenance in a
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) chamber during their first days or weeks of life. In male fetuses, the
testes descend into the scrotum near the end of this period. The fetus at 30 weeks measures 28 cm (11 in) from
crown to rump and exhibits the approximate body proportions of a full-term newborn, but still is much leaner.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/pregstages) for a summary of the stages of pregnancy, as experienced by the
pregnant person, and view the stages of development of the fetus throughout gestation. At what point in fetal
development can a regular heartbeat be detected?
The fetus continues to lay down subcutaneous fat from week 31 until birth. The added fat fills out the hypodermis,
and the skin transitions from red and wrinkled to soft and pink. Lanugo is shed, and the nails grow to the tips of the
fingers and toes. Immediately before birth, the average crown-to-rump length is 35.5–40.5 cm (14–16 in), and the
fetus weighs approximately 2.5–4 kg (5.5–8.8 lbs). Once born, the newborn is no longer confined to the fetal
position, so subsequent measurements are made from head-to-toe instead of from crown-to-rump. At birth, the
average length is approximately 51 cm (20 in).
Disorders of the...
Developing Fetus
Throughout the second half of gestation, the fetal intestines accumulate a tarry, greenish black meconium. The
newborn’s first stools consist almost entirely of meconium; they later transition to seedy yellow stools or slightly
formed tan stools as meconium is cleared and replaced with digested breast milk or formula, respectively.
1242
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
28.4 Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how estrogen, progesterone, and hCG are involved in maintaining pregnancy
•
List the contributors to weight gain during pregnancy
•
Describe the major changes to the maternal digestive, circulatory, and integumentary systems during pregnancy
•
Summarize the events leading to labor
•
Identify and describe each of the three stages of childbirth
A full-term pregnancy lasts approximately 270 days (approximately 38.5 weeks) from conception to birth. Because
it is easier to remember the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP) than to estimate the date of conception,
obstetricians set the due date as 284 days (approximately 40.5 weeks) from the LMP. This assumes that conception
occurred on day 14 of the menstrual cycle, which is usually a good approximation. The 40 weeks of an average
pregnancy are usually discussed in terms of three trimesters, each approximately 13 weeks. During the second and
third trimesters, the pre-pregnancy uterus—about the size of a fist—grows dramatically to contain the fetus, causing
a number of anatomical changes in the pregnant person (Figure 28.18).
Unlike these later stools, meconium is sterile; it is devoid of bacteria because the fetus is in a sterile
environment and has not consumed any breast milk or formula. Typically, an infant does not pass meconium
until after birth. However, in 5–20 percent of births, the fetus has a bowel movement in utero, which can cause
major complications in the newborn.
The passage of meconium in the uterus signals fetal distress, particularly fetal hypoxia (i.e., oxygen deprivation).
This may be caused by maternal drug abuse (especially tobacco or cocaine), maternal hypertension, depletion of
amniotic fluid, long labor or difficult birth, or a defect in the placenta that prevents it from delivering adequate
oxygen to the fetus. Meconium passage is typically a complication of full-term or post-term newborns because it
is rarely passed before 34 weeks of gestation, when the gastrointestinal system has matured and is
appropriately controlled by nervous system stimuli. Fetal distress can stimulate the vagus nerve to trigger
gastrointestinal peristalsis and relaxation of the anal sphincter. Notably, fetal hypoxic stress also induces a
gasping reflex, increasing the likelihood that meconium will be inhaled into the fetal lungs.
Although meconium is a sterile substance, it interferes with the antibiotic properties of the amniotic fluid and
makes the newborn and pregnant person more vulnerable to bacterial infections at birth and during the
perinatal period. Specifically, inflammation of the fetal membranes, inflammation of the uterine lining, or
neonatal sepsis (infection in the newborn) may occur. Meconium also irritates delicate fetal skin and can cause a
rash.
The first sign that a fetus has passed meconium usually does not come until childbirth, when the amniotic sac
ruptures. Normal amniotic fluid is clear and watery, but amniotic fluid in which meconium has been passed is
stained greenish or yellowish.
Aspiration of meconium with the first breath can result in labored breathing, a barrel-shaped chest, or a low
Apgar score. An obstetrician can identify meconium aspiration by listening to the lungs with a stethoscope for a
coarse rattling sound. Blood gas tests and chest X-rays of the infant can confirm meconium aspiration. Inhaled
meconium after birth could obstruct a newborn’s airways leading to alveolar collapse, interfere with surfactant
function by stripping it from the lungs, or cause pulmonary inflammation or hypertension. Any of these
complications will make the newborn much more vulnerable to pulmonary infection, including pneumonia.
28.4 • Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
1243
FIGURE 28.18
Size of Uterus throughout Pregnancy
The uterus grows throughout pregnancy to accommodate the fetus.
Effects of Hormones
Virtually all of the effects of pregnancy can be attributed in some way to the influence of hormones—particularly
estrogens, progesterone, and hCG. During weeks 7–12 from the LMP, the pregnancy hormones are primarily
generated by the corpus luteum. Progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum stimulates the production of decidual
cells of the endometrium that nourish the blastocyst before placentation. As the placenta develops and the corpus
luteum degenerates during weeks 12–17, the placenta gradually takes over as the endocrine organ of pregnancy.
The placenta converts weak androgens secreted by the maternal and fetal adrenal glands to estrogens, which are
necessary for pregnancy to progress. Estrogen levels climb throughout the pregnancy, increasing 30-fold by
childbirth. Estrogens have the following actions:
•
They suppress FSH and LH production, effectively preventing ovulation. (This function is the biological basis of
hormonal birth control pills.)
•
They induce the growth of fetal tissues and are necessary for the maturation of the fetal lungs and liver.
•
They promote fetal viability by regulating progesterone production and triggering fetal synthesis of cortisol,
which helps with the maturation of the lungs, liver, and endocrine organs such as the thyroid gland and adrenal
gland.
•
They stimulate maternal tissue growth, leading to uterine enlargement and mammary duct expansion and
branching.
Relaxin, another hormone secreted by the corpus luteum and then by the placenta, helps prepare the body for
childbirth. It increases the elasticity of the symphysis pubis joint and pelvic ligaments, making room for the growing
fetus and allowing expansion of the pelvic outlet for childbirth. Relaxin also helps dilate the cervix during labor.
The placenta takes over the synthesis and secretion of progesterone throughout pregnancy as the corpus luteum
degenerates. Like estrogen, progesterone suppresses FSH and LH. It also inhibits uterine contractions, protecting
the fetus from preterm birth. This hormone decreases in late gestation, allowing uterine contractions to intensify
and eventually progress to true labor. The placenta also produces hCG. In addition to promoting survival of the
corpus luteum, hCG stimulates the male fetal gonads to secrete testosterone, which is essential for the
1244
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
development of the male reproductive system.
The anterior pituitary enlarges and ramps up its hormone production during pregnancy, raising the levels of
thyrotropin, prolactin, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Thyrotropin, in conjunction with placental
hormones, increases the production of thyroid hormone, which raises the maternal metabolic rate. This can
markedly augment a pregnant person's appetite and cause hot flashes. Prolactin stimulates enlargement of the
mammary glands in preparation for milk production. ACTH stimulates maternal cortisol secretion, which contributes
to fetal protein synthesis. In addition to the pituitary hormones, increased parathyroid levels mobilize calcium from
maternal bones for fetal use.
Weight Gain
The second and third trimesters of pregnancy are associated with dramatic changes in maternal anatomy and
physiology. The most obvious anatomical sign of pregnancy is the dramatic enlargement of the abdominal region,
coupled with weight gain. This weight results from the growing fetus as well as the enlarged uterus, amniotic fluid,
and placenta. Additional breast tissue and dramatically increased blood volume also contribute to weight gain
(Table 28.2). Surprisingly, fat storage accounts for only approximately 2.3 kg (5 lbs) in a normal pregnancy and
serves as a reserve for the increased metabolic demand of breastfeeding.
During the first trimester, a pregnant person does not need to consume additional calories to maintain a healthy
pregnancy. However, a weight gain of approximately 0.45 kg (1 lb) per month is common. During the second and
third trimesters, the appetite increases, but it is only necessary to consume an additional 300 calories per day to
support the growing fetus. Most pregnant people gain approximately 0.45 kg (1 lb) per week.
Contributors to Weight Gain During Pregnancy
Component
Weight (kg)
Weight (lb)
Fetus
3.2–3.6
7–8
Placenta and fetal membranes
0.9–1.8
2–4
Amniotic fluid
0.9–1.4
2–3
Breast tissue
0.9–1.4
2–3
Blood
1.4
4
Fat
0.9–4.1
3–9
Uterus
0.9–2.3
2–5
Total
10–16.3
22–36
TABLE 28.2
Changes in Organ Systems During Pregnancy
As the body adapts to pregnancy, characteristic physiologic changes occur. These changes can sometimes prompt
symptoms often referred to collectively as the common discomforts of pregnancy.
Digestive and Urinary System Changes
Nausea and vomiting, sometimes triggered by an increased sensitivity to odors, are common during the first few
weeks to months of pregnancy. This phenomenon is often referred to as “morning sickness,” although the nausea
may persist all day. The source of pregnancy nausea is thought to be the increased circulation of pregnancy-related
hormones, specifically circulating estrogen, progesterone, and hCG. Decreased intestinal peristalsis may also
28.4 • Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
1245
contribute to nausea. By about week 12 of pregnancy, nausea typically subsides.
A common gastrointestinal complaint during the later stages of pregnancy is gastric reflux, or heartburn, which
results from the upward, constrictive pressure of the growing uterus on the stomach. The same decreased
peristalsis that may contribute to nausea in early pregnancy is also thought to be responsible for pregnancy-related
constipation as pregnancy progresses.
The downward pressure of the uterus also compresses the urinary bladder, leading to frequent urination. The
problem is exacerbated by increased urine production. In addition, the maternal urinary system processes both
maternal and fetal wastes, further increasing the total volume of urine.
Circulatory System Changes
Blood volume increases substantially during pregnancy, so that by childbirth, it exceeds its preconception volume by
30 percent, or approximately 1–2 liters. The greater blood volume helps to manage the demands of fetal
nourishment and fetal waste removal. In conjunction with increased blood volume, the pulse and blood pressure
also rise moderately during pregnancy. As the fetus grows, the uterus compresses underlying pelvic blood vessels,
hampering venous return from the legs and pelvic region. As a result, many pregnant people develop varicose veins
or hemorrhoids.
Respiratory System Changes
During the second half of pregnancy, the respiratory minute volume (volume of gas inhaled or exhaled by the lungs
per minute) increases by 50 percent to compensate for the oxygen demands of the fetus and the increased maternal
metabolic rate. The growing uterus exerts upward pressure on the diaphragm, decreasing the volume of each
inspiration and potentially causing shortness of breath, or dyspnea. During the last several weeks of pregnancy, the
pelvis becomes more elastic, and the fetus descends lower in a process called lightening. This typically ameliorates
dyspnea.
The respiratory mucosa swell in response to increased blood flow during pregnancy, leading to nasal congestion and
nose bleeds, particularly when the weather is cold and dry. Humidifier use and increased fluid intake are often
recommended to counteract congestion.
Integumentary System Changes
The dermis stretches extensively to accommodate the growing uterus, breast tissue, and fat deposits on the thighs
and hips. Torn connective tissue beneath the dermis can cause striae (stretch marks) on the abdomen, which appear
as red or purple marks during pregnancy that fade to a silvery white color in the months after childbirth.
An increase in melanocyte-stimulating hormone, in conjunction with estrogens, darkens the areolae and creates a
line of pigment from the umbilicus to the pubis called the linea nigra (Figure 28.19). Melanin production during
pregnancy may also darken or discolor skin on the face to create a chloasma, or “mask of pregnancy.”
FIGURE 28.19
Linea Nigra
The linea nigra, a dark medial line running from the umbilicus to the pubis, forms during pregnancy and
persists for a few weeks following childbirth. The linea nigra shown here corresponds to a pregnancy that is 22 weeks along.
1246
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
Physiology of Labor
Childbirth, or parturition, typically occurs within a week of the due date, unless the pregnancy involves more than
one fetus, which usually causes labor to begin early. As a pregnancy progresses into its final weeks, several
physiological changes occur in response to hormones that trigger labor.
First, recall that progesterone inhibits uterine contractions throughout the first several months of pregnancy. As the
pregnancy enters its seventh month, progesterone levels plateau and then drop. Estrogen levels, however, continue
to rise in the maternal circulation (Figure 28.20). The increasing ratio of estrogen to progesterone makes the
myometrium (the uterine smooth muscle) more sensitive to stimuli that promote contractions (because
progesterone no longer inhibits them). Moreover, in the eighth month of pregnancy, fetal cortisol rises, which boosts
estrogen secretion by the placenta and further overpowers the uterine-calming effects of progesterone. Some
people may feel the result of the decreasing levels of progesterone in late pregnancy as weak and irregular
peristaltic Braxton Hicks contractions, also called false labor. These contractions can often be relieved with rest or
hydration.
FIGURE 28.20
Hormones Initiating Labor
A positive feedback loop of hormones works to initiate labor.
A common sign that labor will be short is the so-called “bloody show.” During pregnancy, a plug of mucus
accumulates in the cervical canal, blocking the entrance to the uterus. Approximately 1–2 days prior to the onset of
true labor, this plug loosens and is expelled, along with a small amount of blood.
Meanwhile, the posterior pituitary has been boosting its secretion of oxytocin, a hormone that stimulates the
contractions of labor. At the same time, the myometrium increases its sensitivity to oxytocin by expressing more
receptors for this hormone. As labor nears, oxytocin begins to stimulate stronger, more painful uterine contractions,
which—in a positive feedback loop—stimulate the secretion of prostaglandins from fetal membranes. Like oxytocin,
prostaglandins also enhance uterine contractile strength. The fetal pituitary also secretes oxytocin, which increases
prostaglandins even further. Given the importance of oxytocin and prostaglandins to the initiation and maintenance
of labor, it is not surprising that, when a pregnancy is not progressing to labor and needs to be induced, a
pharmaceutical version of these compounds (called pitocin) is administered by intravenous drip.
Finally, stretching of the myometrium and cervix by a full-term fetus in the vertex (head-down) position is regarded
as a stimulant to uterine contractions. The sum of these changes initiates the regular contractions known as true
labor, which become more powerful and more frequent with time. The pain of labor is attributed to myometrial
hypoxia during uterine contractions.
Stages of Childbirth
The process of childbirth can be divided into three stages: cervical dilation, expulsion of the newborn, and afterbirth
(Figure 28.21).
Cervical Dilation
For vaginal birth to occur, the cervix must dilate fully to 10 cm in diameter—wide enough to deliver the newborn’s
head. The dilation stage is the longest stage of labor and typically takes 6–12 hours. However, it varies widely and
28.4 • Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
1247
may take minutes, hours, or days, depending in part on whether the person has given birth before; in each
subsequent labor, this stage tends to be shorter.
FIGURE 28.21
Stages of Childbirth
The stages of childbirth include Stage 1, early cervical dilation; Stage 2, full dilation and expulsion
of the newborn; and Stage 3, delivery of the placenta and associated fetal membranes. (The position of the newborn’s shoulder is described
relative to the person giving birth.)
True labor progresses in a positive feedback loop in which uterine contractions stretch the cervix, causing it to dilate
and efface, or become thinner. Cervical stretching induces reflexive uterine contractions that dilate and efface the
cervix further. In addition, cervical dilation boosts oxytocin secretion from the pituitary, which in turn triggers more
powerful uterine contractions. When labor begins, uterine contractions may occur only every 3–30 minutes and last
only 20–40 seconds; however, by the end of this stage, contractions may occur as frequently as every 1.5–2
minutes and last for a full minute.
Each contraction sharply reduces oxygenated blood flow to the fetus. For this reason, it is critical that a period of
relaxation occur after each contraction. Fetal distress, measured as a sustained decrease or increase in the fetal
1248
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
heart rate, can result from severe contractions that are too powerful or lengthy for oxygenated blood to be restored
to the fetus. Such a situation can be cause for an emergency birth with vacuum, forceps, or surgically by Caesarian
section.
The amniotic membranes rupture before the onset of labor in about 12 percent of people; they typically rupture at
the end of the dilation stage in response to excessive pressure from the fetal head entering the birth canal.
Expulsion Stage
The expulsion stage begins when the fetal head enters the birth canal and ends with birth of the newborn. It
typically takes up to 2 hours, but it can last longer or be completed in minutes, depending in part on the orientation
of the fetus. The vertex presentation known as the occiput anterior vertex is the most common presentation and is
associated with the greatest ease of vaginal birth. The fetus faces the maternal spinal cord and the smallest part of
the head (the posterior aspect called the occiput) exits the birth canal first.
In fewer than 5 percent of births, the infant is oriented in the breech presentation, or buttocks down. In a complete
breech, both legs are crossed and oriented downward. In a frank breech presentation, the legs are oriented upward.
Before the 1960s, it was common for breech presentations to be delivered vaginally. Today, most breech births are
accomplished by Caesarian section.
Vaginal birth is associated with significant stretching of the vaginal canal, the cervix, and the perineum. Until recent
decades, it was routine procedure for an obstetrician to numb the perineum and perform an episiotomy, an incision
in the posterior vaginal wall and perineum. The perineum is now more commonly allowed to tear on its own during
birth. Both an episiotomy and a perineal tear need to be sutured shortly after birth to ensure optimal healing.
Although suturing the jagged edges of a perineal tear may be more difficult than suturing an episiotomy, tears heal
more quickly, are less painful, and are associated with less damage to the muscles around the vagina and rectum.
Upon birth of the newborn’s head, an obstetrician will aspirate mucus from the mouth and nose before the
newborn’s first breath. Once the head is birthed, the rest of the body usually follows quickly. The umbilical cord is
then double-clamped, and a cut is made between the clamps. This completes the second stage of childbirth.
Afterbirth
The delivery of the placenta and associated membranes, commonly referred to as the afterbirth, marks the final
stage of childbirth. After expulsion of the newborn, the myometrium continues to contract. This movement shears
the placenta from the back of the uterine wall. It is then easily delivered through the vagina. Continued uterine
contractions then reduce blood loss from the site of the placenta. Delivery of the placenta marks the beginning of
the postpartum period—the period of approximately 6 weeks immediately following childbirth during which the body
gradually returns to a non-pregnant state. If the placenta does not birth spontaneously within approximately 30
minutes, it is considered retained, and the obstetrician may attempt manual removal. If this is not successful,
surgery may be required.
It is important that the obstetrician examines the expelled placenta and fetal membranes to ensure that they are
intact. If fragments of the placenta remain in the uterus, they can cause postpartum hemorrhage. Uterine
contractions continue for several hours after birth to return the uterus to its pre-pregnancy size in a process called
involution, which also allows the abdominal organs to return to their pre-pregnancy locations. Breastfeeding
facilitates this process.
Although postpartum uterine contractions limit blood loss from the detachment of the placenta, the person who has
recently given birth does experience a postpartum vaginal discharge called lochia. This is made up of uterine lining
cells, erythrocytes, leukocytes, and other debris. Thick, dark, lochia rubra (red lochia) typically continues for 2–3
days, and is replaced by lochia serosa, a thinner, pinkish form that continues until about the tenth postpartum day.
After this period, a scant, creamy, or watery discharge called lochia alba (white lochia) may continue for another 1–2
weeks.
28.4 • Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and Birth
1249
28.5 Adjustments of the Infant at Birth and Postnatal Stages
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the importance of an infant’s first breath
•
Explain the closing of the cardiac shunts
•
Describe thermoregulation in the newborn
•
Summarize the importance of intestinal flora in the newborn
From a fetal perspective, the process of birth is a crisis. In the womb, the fetus was snuggled in a soft, warm, dark,
and quiet world. The placenta provided nutrition and oxygen continuously. Suddenly, the contractions of labor and
vaginal childbirth forcibly squeeze the fetus through the birth canal, limiting oxygenated blood flow during
contractions and shifting the skull bones to accommodate the small space. After birth, the newborn’s system must
make drastic adjustments to a world that is colder, brighter, and louder, and where they will experience hunger and
thirst. The neonatal period (neo- = “new”; -natal = “birth”) spans the first to the thirtieth day of life outside of the
uterus.
Respiratory Adjustments
Although the fetus “practices” breathing by inhaling amniotic fluid in utero, there is no air in the uterus and thus no
true opportunity to breathe. (There is also no need to breathe because the placenta supplies the fetus with all the
oxygenated blood it needs.) During gestation, the partially collapsed lungs are filled with amniotic fluid and exhibit
very little metabolic activity. Several factors stimulate newborns to take their first breath at birth. First, labor
contractions temporarily constrict umbilical blood vessels, reducing oxygenated blood flow to the fetus and
elevating carbon dioxide levels in the blood. High carbon dioxide levels cause acidosis and stimulate the respiratory
center in the brain, triggering the newborn to take a breath.
The first breath typically is taken within 10 seconds of birth, after mucus is aspirated from the infant’s mouth and
nose. The first breaths inflate the lungs to nearly full capacity and dramatically decrease lung pressure and
resistance to blood flow, causing a major circulatory reconfiguration. Pulmonary alveoli open, and alveolar
capillaries fill with blood. Amniotic fluid in the lungs drains or is absorbed, and the lungs immediately take over the
task of the placenta, exchanging carbon dioxide for oxygen by the process of respiration.
Circulatory Adjustments
The process of clamping and cutting the umbilical cord collapses the umbilical blood vessels. In the absence of
medical assistance, this occlusion would occur naturally within 20 minutes of birth because the Wharton’s jelly
within the umbilical cord would swell in response to the lower temperature outside of the mother’s body, and the
blood vessels would constrict. Natural occlusion has occurred when the umbilical cord is no longer pulsating. For
the most part, the collapsed vessels atrophy and become fibrotic remnants, existing in the mature circulatory
system as ligaments of the abdominal wall and liver. The ductus venosus degenerates to become the ligamentum
venosum beneath the liver. Only the proximal sections of the two umbilical arteries remain functional, taking on the
role of supplying blood to the upper part of the bladder (Figure 28.22).
1250
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.22
Neonatal Circulatory System
A newborn’s circulatory system reconfigures immediately after birth. The three fetal
shunts have been closed permanently, facilitating blood flow to the liver and lungs.
The newborn’s first breath is vital to initiate the transition from the fetal to the neonatal circulatory pattern. Inflation
of the lungs decreases blood pressure throughout the pulmonary system, as well as in the right atrium and ventricle.
In response to this pressure change, the flow of blood temporarily reverses direction through the foramen ovale,
moving from the left to the right atrium, and blocking the shunt with two flaps of tissue. Within 1 year, the tissue
flaps usually fuse over the shunt, turning the foramen ovale into the fossa ovalis. The ductus arteriosus constricts as
a result of increased oxygen concentration, and becomes the ligamentum arteriosum. Closing of the ductus
arteriosus ensures that all blood pumped to the pulmonary circuit will be oxygenated by the newly functional
neonatal lungs.
Thermoregulatory Adjustments
The fetus floats in warm amniotic fluid that is maintained at a temperature of approximately 98.6°F with very little
fluctuation. Birth exposes newborns to a cooler environment in which they have to regulate their own body
temperature. Newborns have a higher ratio of surface area to volume than adults. This means that their body has
less volume throughout which to produce heat, and more surface area from which to lose heat. As a result,
newborns produce heat more slowly and lose it more quickly. Newborns also have immature musculature that limits
their ability to generate heat by shivering. Moreover, their nervous systems are underdeveloped, so they cannot
quickly constrict superficial blood vessels in response to cold. They also have little subcutaneous fat for insulation.
All these factors make it harder for newborns to maintain their body temperature.
Newborns, however, do have a special method for generating heat: nonshivering thermogenesis, which involves
the breakdown of brown adipose tissue, or brown fat, which is distributed over the back, chest, and shoulders.
Brown fat differs from the more familiar white fat in two ways:
•
It is highly vascularized. This allows for faster delivery of oxygen, which leads to faster cellular respiration.
•
It is packed with a special type of mitochondria that are able to engage in cellular respiration reactions that
produce less ATP and more heat than standard cellular respiration reactions.
28.5 • Adjustments of the Infant at Birth and Postnatal Stages
1251
The breakdown of brown fat occurs automatically upon exposure to cold, so it is an important heat regulator in
newborns. During fetal development, the placenta secretes inhibitors that prevent metabolism of brown adipose fat
and promote its accumulation in preparation for birth.
Gastrointestinal and Urinary Adjustments
In adults, the gastrointestinal tract harbors bacterial flora—trillions of bacteria that aid in digestion, produce
vitamins, and protect from the invasion or replication of pathogens. In stark contrast, the fetal intestine is sterile.
The first consumption of breast milk or formula floods the neonatal gastrointestinal tract with beneficial bacteria
that begin to establish the bacterial flora.
The fetal kidneys filter blood and produce urine, but the neonatal kidneys are still immature and inefficient at
concentrating urine. Therefore, newborns produce very dilute urine, making it particularly important for infants to
obtain sufficient fluids from breast milk or formula.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Homeostasis in the Newborn: Apgar Score
In the minutes following birth, a newborn must undergo dramatic systemic changes to be able to survive outside the
womb. An obstetrician, midwife, or nurse can estimate how well a newborn is doing by obtaining an Apgar score.
The Apgar score was introduced in 1952 by the anesthesiologist Dr. Virginia Apgar as a method to assess the effects
on the newborn of anesthesia given to the person giving birth. Healthcare providers now use it to assess the general
wellbeing of the newborn, whether or not analgesics or anesthetics were used.
Five criteria—skin color, heart rate, reflex, muscle tone, and respiration—are assessed, and each criterion is assigned
a score of 0, 1, or 2. Scores are taken at 1 minute after birth and again at 5 minutes after birth. Each time that scores
are taken, the five scores are added together. High scores (out of a possible 10) indicate the baby has made the
transition from the womb well, whereas lower scores indicate that the baby may be in distress.
The technique for determining an Apgar score is quick and easy, painless for the newborn, and does not require any
instruments except for a stethoscope. A convenient way to remember the five scoring criteria is to apply the
mnemonic APGAR, for “appearance” (skin color), “pulse” (heart rate), “grimace” (reflex), “activity” (muscle tone),
and “respiration.”
Of the five Apgar criteria, heart rate and respiration are the most critical. Poor scores for either of these
measurements may indicate the need for immediate medical attention to resuscitate or stabilize the newborn. In
general, any score lower than 7 at the 5-minute mark indicates that medical assistance may be needed. A total
score below 5 indicates an emergency situation. Normally, a newborn will get an intermediate score of 1 for some of
the Apgar criteria and will progress to a 2 by the 5-minute assessment. Scores of 8 or above are normal.
28.6 Lactation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure of the lactating breast
•
Summarize the process of lactation
•
Explain how the composition of breast milk changes during the first days of lactation and in the course of a
single feeding
Lactation is the process by which milk is synthesized and secreted from the mammary glands of the postpartum
female breast in response to an infant sucking at the nipple. Breast milk provides ideal nutrition and passive
immunity for the infant, encourages mild uterine contractions to return the uterus to its pre-pregnancy size (i.e.,
involution), and induces a substantial metabolic increase in the postpartum person, consuming the fat reserves
stored during pregnancy.
1252
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
Structure of the Lactating Breast
Mammary glands are modified sweat glands. The non-pregnant and non-lactating female breast is composed
primarily of adipose and collagenous tissue, with mammary glands making up a very minor proportion of breast
volume. The mammary gland is composed of milk-transporting lactiferous ducts, which expand and branch
extensively during pregnancy in response to estrogen, growth hormone, cortisol, and prolactin. Moreover, in
response to progesterone, clusters of breast alveoli bud from the ducts and expand outward toward the chest wall.
Breast alveoli are balloon-like structures lined with milk-secreting cuboidal cells, or lactocytes, that are surrounded
by a net of contractile myoepithelial cells. Milk is secreted from the lactocytes, fills the alveoli, and is squeezed into
the ducts. Clusters of alveoli that drain to a common duct are called lobules; the lactating female has 12–20 lobules
organized radially around the nipple. Milk drains from lactiferous ducts into lactiferous sinuses that meet at 4 to 18
perforations in the nipple, called nipple pores. The small bumps of the areola (the darkened skin around the nipple)
are called Montgomery glands. They secrete oil to cleanse the nipple opening and prevent chapping and cracking of
the nipple during breastfeeding.
The Process of Lactation
The pituitary hormone prolactin is instrumental in the establishment and maintenance of breast milk supply. It also
is important for the mobilization of maternal micronutrients for breast milk.
Near the fifth week of pregnancy, the level of circulating prolactin begins to increase, eventually rising to
approximately 10–20 times the pre-pregnancy concentration. We noted earlier that, during pregnancy, prolactin and
other hormones prepare the breasts anatomically for the secretion of milk. The level of prolactin plateaus in late
pregnancy, at a level high enough to initiate milk production. However, estrogen, progesterone, and other placental
hormones inhibit prolactin-mediated milk synthesis during pregnancy. It is not until the placenta is expelled that
this inhibition is lifted and milk production commences.
After childbirth, the baseline prolactin level drops sharply, but it is restored for a 1-hour spike during each feeding to
stimulate the production of milk for the next feeding. With each prolactin spike, estrogen and progesterone also
increase slightly.
When the infant suckles, sensory nerve fibers in the areola trigger a neuroendocrine reflex that results in milk
secretion from lactocytes into the alveoli. The posterior pituitary releases oxytocin, which stimulates myoepithelial
cells to squeeze milk from the alveoli so it can drain into the lactiferous ducts, collect in the lactiferous sinuses, and
discharge through the nipple pores. It takes less than 1 minute from the time when an infant begins suckling (the
latent period) until milk is secreted (the let-down). Figure 28.23 summarizes the positive feedback loop of the let-
down reflex.
28.6 • Lactation
1253
FIGURE 28.23
Let-Down Reflex
A positive feedback loop ensures continued milk production as long as the infant continues to
breastfeed.
The prolactin-mediated synthesis of milk changes with time. Frequent milk removal by breastfeeding (or pumping)
will maintain high circulating prolactin levels for several months. However, even with continued breastfeeding,
baseline prolactin will decrease over time to its pre-pregnancy level. In addition to prolactin and oxytocin, growth
hormone, cortisol, parathyroid hormone, and insulin contribute to lactation, in part by facilitating the transport of
maternal amino acids, fatty acids, glucose, and calcium to breast milk.
Changes in the Composition of Breast Milk
In the final weeks of pregnancy, the alveoli swell with colostrum, a thick, yellowish substance that is high in protein
but contains less fat and glucose than mature breast milk (Table 28.3). Before childbirth, some people experience
leakage of colostrum from the nipples. In contrast, mature breast milk does not leak during pregnancy and is not
secreted until several days after childbirth.
1254
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
Compositions of Human Colostrum, Mature Breast Milk, and Cow’s Milk (g/L)
Human colostrum
Human breast milk
Cow’s milk*
Total protein
23
11
31
Immunoglobulins
19
0.1
1
Fat
30
45
38
Lactose
57
71
47
Calcium
0.5
0.3
1.4
Phosphorus
0.16
0.14
0.90
Sodium
0.50
0.15
0.41
TABLE 28.3 *Cow’s milk should never be given to an infant. Its composition is not
suitable and its proteins are difficult for the infant to digest.
Colostrum is secreted during the first 48–72 hours postpartum. Only a small volume of colostrum is
produced—approximately 3 ounces in a 24-hour period—but it is sufficient for the newborn in the first few days of
life. Colostrum is rich with immunoglobulins, which confer gastrointestinal, and also likely systemic, immunity as the
newborn adjusts to a nonsterile environment.
After about the third postpartum day, the breast secretes transitional milk that represents an intermediate between
mature milk and colostrum. This is followed by mature milk from approximately postpartum day 10 (see Table
28.3). As you can see in the accompanying table, cow’s milk is not a substitute for breast milk. It contains less
lactose, less fat, and more protein and minerals. Moreover, the proteins in cow’s milk are difficult for an infant’s
immature digestive system to metabolize and absorb.
The first few weeks of breastfeeding may involve leakage, soreness, and periods of milk engorgement as the
relationship between milk supply and infant demand becomes established. Once this period is complete, the
lactating person will produce approximately 1.5 liters of milk per day for a single infant, and more if the person has
twins or triplets. As the infant goes through growth spurts, the milk supply constantly adjusts to accommodate
changes in demand. A person can continue to lactate for years, but once breastfeeding is stopped for approximately
1 week, any remaining milk will be reabsorbed; in most cases, no more will be produced, even if suckling or
pumping is resumed.
Mature milk changes from the beginning to the end of a feeding. The early milk, called foremilk, is watery,
translucent, and rich in lactose and protein. Its purpose is to quench the infant’s thirst. Hindmilk is delivered toward
the end of a feeding. It is opaque, creamy, and rich in fat, and serves to satisfy the infant’s appetite.
During the first days of a newborn’s life, it is important for meconium to be cleared from the intestines and for
bilirubin to be kept low in the circulation. Recall that bilirubin, a product of erythrocyte breakdown, is processed by
the liver and secreted in bile. It enters the gastrointestinal tract and exits the body in the stool. Breast milk has
laxative properties that help expel meconium from the intestines and clear bilirubin through the excretion of bile. A
high concentration of bilirubin in the blood causes jaundice. Some degree of jaundice is normal in newborns, but a
high level of bilirubin—which is neurotoxic—can cause brain damage. Newborns, who do not yet have a fully
functional blood–brain barrier, are highly vulnerable to the bilirubin circulating in the blood. Indeed,
hyperbilirubinemia, a high level of circulating bilirubin, is the most common condition requiring medical attention in
newborns. Newborns with hyperbilirubinemia are treated with phototherapy because UV light helps to break down
the bilirubin quickly.
28.6 • Lactation
1255
28.7 Patterns of Inheritance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Differentiate between genotype and phenotype
•
Describe how alleles determine a person’s traits
•
Summarize Mendel’s experiments and relate them to human genetics
•
Explain the inheritance of autosomal dominant and recessive and sex-linked genetic disorders
We have discussed the events that lead to the development of a newborn. But what makes each newborn unique?
The answer lies, of course, in the DNA in the sperm and oocyte that combined to produce that first diploid cell, the
human zygote.
From Genotype to Phenotype
Each human body cell has a full complement of DNA stored in 23 pairs of chromosomes. Figure 28.24 shows the
pairs in a systematic arrangement called a karyotype. Among these is one pair of chromosomes, called the sex
chromosomes, that determines the sex of the individual (XX in females, XY in males). The remaining 22
chromosome pairs are called autosomal chromosomes. Each of these chromosomes carries hundreds or even
thousands of genes, each of which codes for the assembly of a particular protein—that is, genes are “expressed” as
proteins. An individual’s complete genetic makeup is referred to as their genotype. The characteristics that the
genes express, whether they are physical, behavioral, or biochemical, are a person’s phenotype.
In genetics and reproduction, "parent" is often used to describe the individual organisms that contribute genetic
material to offspring, usually in the form of gamete cells and their chromosomes. The concept of a genetic parent is
distinct from social and legal concepts of parenthood, and may differ from those whom people consider their
parents.
You inherit one chromosome in each pair—a full complement of 23—from each parent. This occurs when the sperm
and oocyte combine at the moment of your conception. Homologous chromosomes—those that make up a
complementary pair—have genes for the same characteristics in the same location on the chromosome. Because
one copy of a gene, an allele, is inherited from each parent, the alleles in these complementary pairs may vary. Take
for example an allele that encodes for dimples. A child may inherit the allele encoding for dimples on the
chromosome from the one parent and the allele that encodes for smooth skin (no dimples) on the chromosome
from the other parent.
1256
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.24
Chromosomal Complement of a Male
Each pair of chromosomes contains hundreds to thousands of genes. The
banding patterns are nearly identical for the two chromosomes within each pair, indicating the same organization of genes. As is visible in
this karyotype, the only exception to this is the XY sex chromosome pair in males. (credit: National Human Genome Research Institute)
Although a person can have two identical alleles for a single gene (a homozygous state), it is also possible for a
person to have two different alleles (a heterozygous state). The two alleles can interact in several different ways.
The expression of an allele can be dominant, for which the activity of this gene will mask the expression of a
nondominant, or recessive, allele. Sometimes dominance is complete; at other times, it is incomplete. In some
cases, both alleles are expressed at the same time in a form of expression known as codominance.
In the simplest scenario, a single pair of genes will determine a single heritable characteristic. However, it is quite
common for multiple genes to interact to confer a feature. For instance, eight or more genes—each with their own
alleles—determine eye color in humans. Moreover, although any one person can only have two alleles corresponding
to a given gene, more than two alleles commonly exist in a population. This phenomenon is called multiple alleles.
For example, there are three different alleles that encode ABO blood type; these are designated IA, IB, and i.
Over 100 years of theoretical and experimental genetics studies, and the more recent sequencing and annotation of
the human genome, have helped scientists to develop a better understanding of how an individual’s genotype is
expressed as their phenotype. This body of knowledge can help scientists and medical professionals to predict, or at
least estimate, some of the features that an offspring will inherit by examining the genotypes or phenotypes of the
parents. One important application of this knowledge is to identify an individual’s risk for certain heritable genetic
disorders. However, most diseases have a multigenic pattern of inheritance and can also be affected by the
environment, so examining the genotypes or phenotypes of a person’s parents will provide only limited information
about the risk of inheriting a disease. Only for a handful of single-gene disorders can genetic testing allow clinicians
to calculate the probability with which a child born to the two parents tested may inherit a specific disease.
Mendel’s Theory of Inheritance
Our contemporary understanding of genetics rests on the work of a nineteenth-century monk. Working in the
mid-1800s, long before anyone knew about genes or chromosomes, Gregor Mendel discovered that garden peas
transmit their physical characteristics to subsequent generations in a discrete and predictable fashion. When he
mated, or crossed, two pure-breeding pea plants that differed by a certain characteristic, the first-generation
offspring all looked like one of the parents. For instance, when he crossed tall and dwarf pure-breeding pea plants,
all of the offspring were tall. Mendel called tallness dominant because it was expressed in offspring when it was
28.7 • Patterns of Inheritance
1257
present in a purebred parent. He called dwarfism recessive because it was masked in the offspring if one of the
purebred parents possessed the dominant characteristic. Note that tallness and dwarfism are variations on the
characteristic of height. Mendel called such a variation a trait. We now know that these traits are the expression of
different alleles of the gene encoding height.
Mendel performed thousands of crosses in pea plants with differing traits for a variety of characteristics. And he
repeatedly came up with the same results—among the traits he studied, one was always dominant, and the other
was always recessive. (Remember, however, that this dominant–recessive relationship between alleles is not always
the case; some alleles are codominant, and sometimes dominance is incomplete.)
Using his understanding of dominant and recessive traits, Mendel tested whether a recessive trait could be lost
altogether in a pea lineage or whether it would resurface in a later generation. By crossing the second-generation
offspring of purebred parents with each other, he showed that the latter was true: recessive traits reappeared in
third-generation plants in a ratio of 3:1 (three offspring having the dominant trait and one having the recessive trait).
Mendel then proposed that characteristics such as height were determined by heritable “factors” that were
transmitted, one from each parent, and inherited in pairs by offspring.
In the language of genetics, Mendel’s theory applied to humans says that if an individual receives two dominant
alleles, one from each parent, the individual’s phenotype will express the dominant trait. If an individual receives
two recessive alleles, then the recessive trait will be expressed in the phenotype. Individuals who have two identical
alleles for a given gene, whether dominant or recessive, are said to be homozygous for that gene (homo- = “same”).
Conversely, an individual who has one dominant allele and one recessive allele is said to be heterozygous for that
gene (hetero- = “different” or “other”). In this case, the dominant trait will be expressed, and the individual will be
phenotypically identical to an individual who possesses two dominant alleles for the trait.
It is common practice in genetics to use capital and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive alleles.
Using Mendel’s pea plants as an example, if a tall pea plant is homozygous, it will possess two tall alleles (TT). A
dwarf pea plant must be homozygous because its dwarfism can only be expressed when two recessive alleles are
present (tt). A heterozygous pea plant (Tt) would be tall and phenotypically indistinguishable from a tall homozygous
pea plant because of the dominant tall allele. Mendel deduced that a 3:1 ratio of dominant to recessive would be
produced by the random segregation of heritable factors (genes) when crossing two heterozygous pea plants. In
other words, for any given gene, parents are equally likely to pass down either one of their alleles to their offspring in
a haploid gamete, and the result will be expressed in a dominant–recessive pattern if both parents are heterozygous
for the trait.
Because of the random segregation of gametes, the laws of chance and probability come into play when predicting
the likelihood of a given phenotype. Consider a cross between an individual with two dominant alleles for a trait (AA)
and an individual with two recessive alleles for the same trait (aa). All of the parental gametes from the dominant
individual would be A, and all of the parental gametes from the recessive individual would be a (Figure 28.25). All of
the offspring of that second generation, inheriting one allele from each parent, would have the genotype Aa, and the
probability of expressing the phenotype of the dominant allele would be 4 out of 4, or 100 percent.
This seems simple enough, but the inheritance pattern gets interesting when the second-generation Aa individuals
are crossed. In this generation, 50 percent of each parent’s gametes are A and the other 50 percent are a. By
Mendel’s principle of random segregation, the possible combinations of gametes that the offspring can receive are
AA, Aa, aA (which is the same as Aa), and aa. Because segregation and fertilization are random, each offspring has a
25 percent chance of receiving any of these combinations. Therefore, if an Aa × Aa cross were performed 1000
times, approximately 250 (25 percent) of the offspring would be AA; 500 (50 percent) would be Aa (that is, Aa plus
aA); and 250 (25 percent) would be aa. The genotypic ratio for this inheritance pattern is 1:2:1. However, we have
already established that AA and Aa (and aA) individuals all express the dominant trait (i.e., share the same
phenotype), and can therefore be combined into one group. The result is Mendel’s third-generation phenotype ratio
of 3:1.
1258
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.25
Random Segregation
In the formation of gametes, it is equally likely that either one of a pair alleles from one parent
will be passed on to the offspring. This figure follows the possible combinations of alleles through two generations following a first-
generation cross of homozygous dominant and homozygous recessive parents. The recessive phenotype, which is masked in the second
generation, has a 1 in 4, or 25 percent, chance of reappearing in the third generation.
Mendel’s observation of pea plants also included many crosses that involved multiple traits, which prompted him to
formulate the principle of independent assortment. The law states that the members of one pair of genes (alleles)
from a parent will sort independently from other pairs of genes during the formation of gametes. Applied to pea
plants, that means that the alleles associated with the different traits of the plant, such as color, height, or seed
type, will sort independently of one another. This holds true except when two alleles happen to be located close to
one other on the same chromosome. Independent assortment provides for a great degree of diversity in offspring.
Mendelian genetics represent the fundamentals of inheritance, but there are two important qualifiers to consider
when applying Mendel’s findings to inheritance studies in humans. First, as we’ve already noted, not all genes are
inherited in a dominant–recessive pattern. Although all diploid individuals have two alleles for every gene, allele
pairs may interact to create several types of inheritance patterns, including incomplete dominance and
codominance.
Secondly, Mendel performed his studies using thousands of pea plants. He was able to identify a 3:1 phenotypic
ratio in second-generation offspring because his large sample size overcame the influence of variability resulting
from chance. In contrast, no human couple has ever had thousands of children. If we know that parents are both
heterozygous for a recessive genetic disorder, we would predict that one in every four of their children would be
affected by the disease. In real life, however, the influence of chance could change that ratio significantly. For
example, if parents are both heterozygous for cystic fibrosis, a recessive genetic disorder that is expressed only
when the individual has two defective alleles, we would expect one in four of their children to have cystic fibrosis.
However, it is entirely possible for them to have seven children, none of whom is affected, or for them to have two
children, both of whom are affected. For each individual child, the presence or absence of a single gene disorder
depends on which alleles that child inherits from their parents.
Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
In the case of cystic fibrosis, the disorder is recessive to the normal phenotype. However, a genetic abnormality may
be dominant to the normal phenotype. When the dominant allele is located on one of the 22 pairs of autosomes
(non-sex chromosomes), we refer to its inheritance pattern as autosomal dominant. An example of an autosomal
dominant disorder is neurofibromatosis type I, a disease that induces tumor formation within the nervous system
that leads to skin and skeletal deformities. Consider a couple in which one parent is heterozygous for this disorder
(and who therefore has neurofibromatosis), Nn, and one parent is homozygous for the normal gene, nn. The
heterozygous parent would have a 50 percent chance of passing the dominant allele for this disorder to their
offspring, and the homozygous parent would always pass the normal allele. Therefore, four possible offspring
28.7 • Patterns of Inheritance
1259
genotypes are equally likely to occur: Nn, Nn, nn, and nn. That is, every child of this couple would have a 50 percent
chance of inheriting neurofibromatosis. This inheritance pattern is shown in Figure 28.26, in a form called a Punnett
square, named after its creator, the British geneticist Reginald Punnett.
FIGURE 28.26
Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
Inheritance pattern of an autosomal dominant disorder, such as neurofibromatosis,
is shown in a Punnett square.
Other genetic diseases that are inherited in this pattern are achondroplastic dwarfism, Marfan syndrome, and
Huntington’s disease. Because autosomal dominant disorders are expressed by the presence of just one gene, an
individual with the disorder will know that they have at least one faulty gene. The expression of the disease may
manifest later in life, after the childbearing years, which is the case in Huntington’s disease (discussed in more detail
later in this section).
Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
When a genetic disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, the disorder corresponds to the recessive
phenotype. Heterozygous individuals will not display symptoms of this disorder, because their unaffected gene will
compensate. Such an individual is called a carrier. Carriers for an autosomal recessive disorder may never know
their genotype unless they have a child with the disorder.
An example of an autosomal recessive disorder is cystic fibrosis (CF), which we introduced earlier. CF is
characterized by the chronic accumulation of a thick, tenacious mucus in the lungs and digestive tract. Decades ago,
children with CF rarely lived to adulthood. With advances in medical technology, the average lifespan in developed
countries has increased into middle adulthood. CF is a relatively common disorder that occurs in approximately
30,000 people in the United States. A child born to two CF carriers would have a 25 percent chance of inheriting the
disease. This is the same 3:1 dominant:recessive ratio that Mendel observed in his pea plants would apply here. The
pattern is shown in Figure 28.27, using a diagram that tracks the likely incidence of an autosomal recessive disorder
on the basis of parental genotypes.
On the other hand, a child born to a CF carrier and someone with two unaffected alleles would have a 0 percent
probability of inheriting CF, but would have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier. Other examples of autosome
recessive genetic illnesses include the blood disorder sickle-cell anemia, the fatal neurological disorder Tay–Sachs
disease, and the metabolic disorder phenylketonuria.
1260
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
FIGURE 28.27
Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
The inheritance pattern of an autosomal recessive disorder with two carrier parents
reflects a 3:1 probability of expression among offspring. (credit: U.S. National Library of Medicine)
X-linked Dominant or Recessive Inheritance
An X-linked transmission pattern involves genes located on the X chromosome of the 23rd pair (Figure 28.28).
Recall that a male has one X and one Y chromosome. When a male transmits a Y chromosome, the child is male, and
when a male parent transmits an X chromosome, the child is female. A female can transmit only an X chromosome,
as both her sex chromosomes are X chromosomes.
When an abnormal allele for a gene that occurs on the X chromosome is dominant over the normal allele, the
pattern is described as X-linked dominant. This is the case with vitamin D–resistant rickets: an affected male would
pass the disease gene to all of the female offspring, but none of the male offspring, because the male transmits only
the Y chromosome to male offspring (see Figure 28.28a). If it is the female parent who is affected, all of the
offspring—male or female—would have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disorder because the female parent
can only pass an X chromosome on to children (see Figure 28.28b). For an affected female, the inheritance pattern
would be identical to that of an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in which one parent is heterozygous and
the other is homozygous for the normal gene.
28.7 • Patterns of Inheritance
1261
FIGURE 28.28
X-Linked Patterns of Inheritance
A chart of X-linked dominant inheritance patterns differs depending on which parent
is affected with the disease. (credit: U.S. National Library of Medicine)
X-linked recessive inheritance is much more common because females can be carriers of the disease yet still have
a normal phenotype. Diseases transmitted by X-linked recessive inheritance include color blindness, the blood-
clotting disorder hemophilia, and some forms of muscular dystrophy. For an example of X-linked recessive
inheritance, consider parents in which the female is an unaffected carrier and the male is normal. None of the
female offspring would have the disease because they receive a normal gene from their male parent. However, they
have a 50 percent chance of receiving the disease gene from their female parent and becoming a carrier. In contrast,
50 percent of the male offspring would be affected (Figure 28.29).
With X-linked recessive diseases, males either have the disease or are genotypically normal—they cannot be
carriers. Females, however, can be genotypically normal, a carrier who is phenotypically normal, or affected with the
disease. A female can inherit the gene for an X-linked recessive illness when the female parent is a carrier or
1262
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
affected, or the male parent is affected. Female offspring will be affected by the disease only if they inherit an X-
linked recessive gene from both parents. As you can imagine, X-linked recessive disorders affect many more males
than females. For example, color blindness affects at least 1 in 20 males, but only about 1 in 400 females.
FIGURE 28.29
X-Linked Recessive Inheritance
Given two parents in which the male is normal and the female is a carrier of an X-linked
recessive disorder, a male offspring would have a 50 percent probability of being affected with the disorder, whereas female offspring
would either be carriers or entirely unaffected. (credit: U.S. National Library of Medicine)
Other Inheritance Patterns: Incomplete Dominance, Codominance, and Lethal Alleles
Not all genetic disorders are inherited in a dominant–recessive pattern. In incomplete dominance, the offspring
express a heterozygous phenotype that is intermediate between one parent’s homozygous dominant trait and the
other parent’s homozygous recessive trait. An example of this can be seen in snapdragons when red-flowered plants
and white-flowered plants are crossed to produce pink-flowered plants. In humans, incomplete dominance occurs
with one of the genes for hair texture. When one parent passes a curly hair allele (the incompletely dominant allele)
and the other parent passes a straight-hair allele, the effect on the offspring will be intermediate, resulting in hair
that is wavy.
Codominance is characterized by the equal, distinct, and simultaneous expression of both parents’ different alleles.
This pattern differs from the intermediate, blended features seen in incomplete dominance. A classic example of
codominance in humans is ABO blood type. People are blood type A if they have an allele for an enzyme that
facilitates the production of surface antigen A on their erythrocytes. This allele is designated IA. In the same
manner, people are blood type B if they express an enzyme for the production of surface antigen B. People who have
alleles for both enzymes (IA and IB) produce both surface antigens A and B. As a result, they are blood type AB.
Because the effect of both alleles (or enzymes) is observed, we say that the IA and IB alleles are codominant. There
is also a third allele that determines blood type. This allele (i) produces a nonfunctional enzyme. People who have
two i alleles do not produce either A or B surface antigens: they have type O blood. If a person has IA and i alleles,
the person will have blood type A. Notice that it does not make any difference whether a person has two IA alleles or
one IA and one i allele. In both cases, the person is blood type A. Because IA masks i, we say that IA is dominant to i.
Table 28.4 summarizes the expression of blood type.
28.7 • Patterns of Inheritance
1263
Expression of Blood Types
Blood type
Genotype
Pattern of inheritance
A
IAIA or IAi
IA is dominant to i
B
IBIB or IBi
IB is dominant to i
AB
IAIB
IA is co-dominant to IB
O
ii
Two recessive alleles
TABLE 28.4
Certain combinations of alleles can be lethal, meaning they prevent the individual from developing in utero, or cause
a shortened life span. In recessive lethal inheritance patterns, a child who is born to two heterozygous (carrier)
parents and who inherited the faulty allele from both would not survive. An example of this is Tay–Sachs, a fatal
disorder of the nervous system. In this disorder, parents with one copy of the allele for the disorder are carriers. If
they both transmit their abnormal allele, their offspring will develop the disease and will die in childhood, usually
before age 5.
Dominant lethal inheritance patterns are much more rare because neither heterozygotes nor homozygotes survive.
Of course, dominant lethal alleles that arise naturally through mutation and cause miscarriages or stillbirths are
never transmitted to subsequent generations. However, some dominant lethal alleles, such as the allele for
Huntington’s disease, cause a shortened life span but may not be identified until after the person reaches
reproductive age and has children. Huntington’s disease causes irreversible nerve cell degeneration and death in
100 percent of affected individuals, but it may not be expressed until the individual reaches middle age. In this way,
dominant lethal alleles can be maintained in the human population. Individuals with a family history of Huntington’s
disease are typically offered genetic counseling, which can help them decide whether or not they wish to be tested
for the faulty gene.
Mutations
A mutation is a change in the sequence of DNA nucleotides that may or may not affect a person’s phenotype.
Mutations can arise spontaneously from errors during DNA replication, or they can result from environmental insults
such as radiation, certain viruses, or exposure to tobacco smoke or other toxic chemicals. Because genes encode for
the assembly of proteins, a mutation in the nucleotide sequence of a gene can change amino acid sequence and,
consequently, a protein’s structure and function. Spontaneous mutations occurring during meiosis are thought to
account for many spontaneous abortions (miscarriages).
Chromosomal Disorders
Sometimes a genetic disease is not caused by a mutation in a gene, but by the presence of an incorrect number of
chromosomes. For example, Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of chromosome 21. This is known as
trisomy 21. The most common cause of trisomy 21 is chromosomal nondisjunction during meiosis. The frequency of
nondisjunction events appears to increase with age, so the frequency of bearing a child with Down syndrome
increases in females over 36. The age of the male parent matters less because nondisjunction is much less likely to
occur in a sperm than in an egg.
Whereas Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of a chromosome, Turner syndrome is caused by having
just one copy of the X chromosome. This is known as monosomy. The affected child is always female. Women with
Turner syndrome are sterile because their sexual organs do not mature.
1264
28 • Development and Inheritance
Access for free at openstax.org
CAREER CONNECTION
Genetic Counselor
Given the intricate orchestration of gene expression, cell migration, and cell differentiation during prenatal
development, it is amazing that the vast majority of newborns are healthy and free of major birth defects. When a
person over 35 is pregnant or intends to become pregnant, or their partner is over 55, or if there is a family history of
a genetic disorder, they may want to speak to a genetic counselor to discuss the likelihood that their child may be
affected by a genetic or chromosomal disorder. A genetic counselor can interpret a couple’s family history and
estimate the risks to their future offspring.
For many genetic diseases, a DNA test can determine whether a person is a carrier. For instance, carrier status for
Fragile X, an X-linked disorder associated with intellectual disabilites, or for cystic fibrosis can be determined with a
simple blood draw to obtain DNA for testing. A genetic counselor can educate a couple about the implications of
such a test and help them decide whether to undergo testing. For chromosomal disorders, the available testing
options include a blood test, amniocentesis (in which amniotic fluid is tested), and chorionic villus sampling (in
which tissue from the placenta is tested). Each of these has advantages and drawbacks. A genetic counselor can
also help a couple cope with the news that either one or both partners is a carrier of a genetic illness, or that their
unborn child has been diagnosed with a chromosomal disorder or other birth defect.
To become a genetic counselor, one needs to complete a 4-year undergraduate program and then obtain a Master of
Science in Genetic Counseling from an accredited university. Board certification is attained after passing
examinations by the American Board of Genetic Counseling. Genetic counselors are essential professionals in many
branches of medicine, but there is a particular demand for preconception and prenatal genetic counselors.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit the National Society of Genetic Counselors website (http://openstax.org/l/gencounselor1) for more information
about genetic counselors.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit the American Board of Genetic Counselors, Inc., website (http://openstax.org/l/gencounselor2) for more
information about genetic counselors.
28.7 • Patterns of Inheritance
1265
Key Terms
acrosomal reaction
release of digestive enzymes by
sperm that enables them to burrow through the
corona radiata and penetrate the zona pellucida of
an oocyte prior to fertilization
acrosome
cap-like vesicle located at the anterior-
most region of a sperm that is rich with lysosomal
enzymes capable of digesting the protective layers
surrounding the oocyte
afterbirth
third stage of childbirth in which the
placenta and associated fetal membranes are
expelled
allantois
finger-like outpocketing of yolk sac forms
the primitive excretory duct of the embryo;
precursor to the urinary bladder
allele
alternative forms of a gene that occupy a
specific locus on a specific gene
amnion
transparent membranous sac that encloses
the developing fetus and fills with amniotic fluid
amniotic cavity
cavity that opens up between the
inner cell mass and the trophoblast; develops into
amnion
autosomal chromosome
in humans, the 22 pairs of
chromosomes that are not the sex chromosomes
(XX or XY)
autosomal dominant
pattern of dominant inheritance
that corresponds to a gene on one of the 22
autosomal chromosomes
autosomal recessive
pattern of recessive inheritance
that corresponds to a gene on one of the 22
autosomal chromosomes
blastocoel
fluid-filled cavity of the blastocyst
blastocyst
term for the conceptus at the
developmental stage that consists of about 100
cells shaped into an inner cell mass that is fated to
become the embryo and an outer trophoblast that is
fated to become the associated fetal membranes
and placenta
blastomere
daughter cell of a cleavage
Braxton Hicks contractions
weak and irregular
peristaltic contractions that can occur in the second
and third trimesters; they do not indicate that
childbirth is imminent
brown adipose tissue
highly vascularized fat tissue
that is packed with mitochondria; these properties
confer the ability to oxidize fatty acids to generate
heat
capacitation
process that occurs in the female
reproductive tract in which sperm are prepared for
fertilization; leads to increased motility and changes
in their outer membrane that improve their ability to
release enzymes capable of digesting an oocyte’s
outer layers
carrier
heterozygous individual who does not display
symptoms of a recessive genetic disorder but can
transmit the disorder to their offspring
chorion
membrane that develops from the
syncytiotrophoblast, cytotrophoblast, and
mesoderm; surrounds the embryo and forms the
fetal portion of the placenta through the chorionic
villi
chorionic membrane
precursor to the chorion; forms
from extra-embryonic mesoderm cells
chorionic villi
projections of the chorionic membrane
that burrow into the endometrium and develop into
the placenta
cleavage
form of mitotic cell division in which the cell
divides but the total volume remains unchanged;
this process serves to produce smaller and smaller
cells
codominance
pattern of inheritance that corresponds
to the equal, distinct, and simultaneous expression
of two different alleles
colostrum
thick, yellowish substance secreted from a
mother’s breasts in the first postpartum days; rich in
immunoglobulins
conceptus
pre-implantation stage of a fertilized egg
and its associated membranes
corona radiata
in an oocyte, a layer of granulosa cells
that surrounds the oocyte and that must be
penetrated by sperm before fertilization can occur
cortical reaction
following fertilization, the release of
cortical granules from the oocyte’s plasma
membrane into the zona pellucida creating a
fertilization membrane that prevents any further
attachment or penetration of sperm; part of the
slow block to polyspermy
dilation
first stage of childbirth, involving an increase
in cervical diameter
dominant
describes a trait that is expressed both in
homozygous and heterozygous form
dominant lethal
inheritance pattern in which
individuals with one or two copies of a lethal allele
do not survive in utero or have a shortened life span
ductus arteriosus
shunt in the pulmonary trunk that
diverts oxygenated blood back to the aorta
ductus venosus
shunt that causes oxygenated blood
to bypass the fetal liver on its way to the inferior
vena cava
ectoderm
primary germ layer that develops into the
central and peripheral nervous systems, sensory
organs, epidermis, hair, and nails
ectopic pregnancy
implantation of an embryo
outside of the uterus
embryo
developing human during weeks 3–8
1266
28 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
embryonic folding
process by which an embryo
develops from a flat disc of cells to a three-
dimensional shape resembling a cylinder
endoderm
primary germ layer that goes on to form
the gastrointestinal tract, liver, pancreas, and lungs
epiblast
upper layer of cells of the embryonic disc
that forms from the inner cell mass; gives rise to all
three germ layers
episiotomy
incision made in the posterior vaginal
wall and perineum that facilitates vaginal birth
expulsion
second stage of childbirth, during which
the mother bears down with contractions; this stage
ends in birth
fertilization
unification of genetic material from male
and female haploid gametes
fertilization membrane
impenetrable barrier that
coats a nascent zygote; part of the slow block to
polyspermy
fetus
developing human during the time from the end
of the embryonic period (week 9) to birth
foramen ovale
shunt that directly connects the right
and left atria and helps divert oxygenated blood
from the fetal pulmonary circuit
foremilk
watery, translucent breast milk that is
secreted first during a feeding and is rich in lactose
and protein; quenches the infant’s thirst
gastrulation
process of cell migration and
differentiation into three primary germ layers
following cleavage and implantation
genotype
complete genetic makeup of an individual
gestation
in human development, the period required
for embryonic and fetal development in utero;
pregnancy
heterozygous
having two different alleles for a given
gene
hindmilk
opaque, creamy breast milk delivered
toward the end of a feeding; rich in fat; satisfies the
infant’s appetite
homozygous
having two identical alleles for a given
gene
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
hormone that
directs the corpus luteum to survive, enlarge, and
continue producing progesterone and estrogen to
suppress menses and secure an environment
suitable for the developing embryo
hypoblast
lower layer of cells of the embryonic disc
that extend into the blastocoel to form the yolk sac
implantation
process by which a blastocyst embeds
itself in the uterine endometrium
incomplete dominance
pattern of inheritance in
which a heterozygous genotype expresses a
phenotype intermediate between dominant and
recessive phenotypes
inner cell mass
cluster of cells within the blastocyst
that is fated to become the embryo
involution
postpartum shrinkage of the uterus back
to its pre-pregnancy volume
karyotype
systematic arrangement of images of
chromosomes into homologous pairs
lactation
process by which milk is synthesized and
secreted from the mammary glands of the
postpartum female breast in response to sucking at
the nipple
lanugo
silk-like hairs that coat the fetus; shed later in
fetal development
let-down reflex
release of milk from the alveoli
triggered by infant suckling
lightening
descent of the fetus lower into the pelvis
in late pregnancy; also called “dropping”
lochia
postpartum vaginal discharge that begins as
blood and ends as a whitish discharge; the end of
lochia signals that the site of placental attachment
has healed
meconium
fetal wastes consisting of ingested
amniotic fluid, cellular debris, mucus, and bile
mesoderm
primary germ layer that becomes the
skeleton, muscles, connective tissue, heart, blood
vessels, and kidneys
morula
tightly packed sphere of blastomeres that has
reached the uterus but has not yet implanted itself
mutation
change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA
neural fold
elevated edge of the neural groove
neural plate
thickened layer of neuroepithelium that
runs longitudinally along the dorsal surface of an
embryo and gives rise to nervous system tissue
neural tube
precursor to structures of the central
nervous system, formed by the invagination and
separation of neuroepithelium
neurulation
embryonic process that establishes the
central nervous system
nonshivering thermogenesis
process of breaking
down brown adipose tissue to produce heat in the
absence of a shivering response
notochord
rod-shaped, mesoderm-derived structure
that provides support for growing fetus
organogenesis
development of the rudimentary
structures of all of an embryo’s organs from the
germ layers
parturition
childbirth
phenotype
physical or biochemical manifestation of
the genotype; expression of the alleles
placenta
organ that forms during pregnancy to
nourish the developing fetus; also regulates waste
and gas exchange between mother and fetus
placenta previa
low placement of fetus within uterus
causes placenta to partially or completely cover the
28 • Key Terms
1267
opening of the cervix as it grows
placentation
formation of the placenta; complete by
weeks 14–16 of pregnancy
polyspermy
penetration of an oocyte by more than
one sperm
primitive streak
indentation along the dorsal surface
of the epiblast through which cells migrate to form
the endoderm and mesoderm during gastrulation
prolactin
pituitary hormone that establishes and
maintains the supply of breast milk; also important
for the mobilization of maternal micronutrients for
breast milk
Punnett square
grid used to display all possible
combinations of alleles transmitted by parents to
offspring and predict the mathematical probability
of offspring inheriting a given genotype
quickening
fetal movements that are strong enough
to be felt by the mother
recessive
describes a trait that is only expressed in
homozygous form and is masked in heterozygous
form
recessive lethal
inheritance pattern in which
individuals with two copies of a lethal allele do not
survive in utero or have a shortened life span
sex chromosomes
pair of chromosomes involved in
sex determination; in males, the XY chromosomes;
in females, the XX chromosomes
shunt
circulatory shortcut that diverts the flow of
blood from one region to another
somite
one of the paired, repeating blocks of tissue
located on either side of the notochord in the early
embryo
syncytiotrophoblast
superficial cells of the
trophoblast that fuse to form a multinucleated body
that digests endometrial cells to firmly secure the
blastocyst to the uterine wall
trait
variation of an expressed characteristic
trimester
division of the duration of a pregnancy into
three 3-month terms
trophoblast
fluid-filled shell of squamous cells
destined to become the chorionic villi, placenta, and
associated fetal membranes
true labor
regular contractions that immediately
precede childbirth; they do not abate with hydration
or rest, and they become more frequent and
powerful with time
umbilical cord
connection between the developing
conceptus and the placenta; carries deoxygenated
blood and wastes from the fetus and returns
nutrients and oxygen from the mother
vernix caseosa
waxy, cheese-like substance that
protects the delicate fetal skin until birth
X-linked
pattern of inheritance in which an allele is
carried on the X chromosome of the 23rd pair
X-linked dominant
pattern of dominant inheritance
that corresponds to a gene on the X chromosome of
the 23rd pair
X-linked recessive
pattern of recessive inheritance
that corresponds to a gene on the X chromosome of
the 23rd pair
yolk sac
membrane associated with primitive
circulation to the developing embryo; source of the
first blood cells and germ cells and contributes to
the umbilical cord structure
zona pellucida
thick, gel-like glycoprotein membrane
that coats the oocyte and must be penetrated by
sperm before fertilization can occur
zygote
fertilized egg; a diploid cell resulting from the
fertilization of haploid gametes from the male and
female lines
Chapter Review
28.1 Fertilization
Hundreds of millions of sperm deposited in the vagina
travel toward the oocyte, but only a few hundred
actually reach it. The number of sperm that reach the
oocyte is greatly reduced because of conditions within
the female reproductive tract. Many sperm are
overcome by the acidity of the vagina, others are
blocked by mucus in the cervix, whereas others are
attacked by phagocytic leukocytes in the uterus. Those
sperm that do survive undergo a change in response to
those conditions. They go through the process of
capacitation, which improves their motility and alters
the membrane surrounding the acrosome, the cap-like
structure in the head of a sperm that contains the
digestive enzymes needed for it to attach to and
penetrate the oocyte.
The oocyte that is released by ovulation is protected by
a thick outer layer of granulosa cells known as the
corona radiata and by the zona pellucida, a thick
glycoprotein membrane that lies just outside the
oocyte’s plasma membrane. When capacitated sperm
make contact with the oocyte, they release the
digestive enzymes in the acrosome (the acrosomal
reaction) and are thus able to attach to the oocyte and
burrow through to the oocyte’s zona pellucida. One of
the sperm will then break through to the oocyte’s
plasma membrane and release its haploid nucleus into
the oocyte. The oocyte’s membrane structure changes
in response (cortical reaction), preventing any further
penetration by another sperm and forming a
fertilization membrane. Fertilization is complete upon
unification of the haploid nuclei of the two gametes,
1268
28 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
producing a diploid zygote.
28.2 Embryonic Development
As the zygote travels toward the uterus, it undergoes
numerous cleavages in which the number of cells
doubles (blastomeres). Upon reaching the uterus, the
conceptus has become a tightly packed sphere of cells
called the morula, which then forms into a blastocyst
consisting of an inner cell mass within a fluid-filled
cavity surrounded by trophoblasts. The blastocyst
implants in the uterine wall, the trophoblasts fuse to
form a syncytiotrophoblast, and the conceptus is
enveloped by the endometrium. Four embryonic
membranes form to support the growing embryo: the
amnion, the yolk sac, the allantois, and the chorion.
The chorionic villi of the chorion extend into the
endometrium to form the fetal portion of the placenta.
The placenta supplies the growing embryo with oxygen
and nutrients; it also removes carbon dioxide and other
metabolic wastes.
Following implantation, embryonic cells undergo
gastrulation, in which they differentiate and separate
into an embryonic disc and establish three primary
germ layers (the endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm). Through the process of embryonic folding,
the fetus begins to take shape. Neurulation starts the
process of the development of structures of the central
nervous system and organogenesis establishes the
basic plan for all organ systems.
28.3 Fetal Development
The fetal period lasts from the ninth week of
development until birth. During this period, male and
female gonads differentiate. The fetal circulatory
system becomes much more specialized and efficient
than its embryonic counterpart. It includes three
shunts—the ductus venosus, the foramen ovale, and
the ductus arteriosus—that enable it to bypass the
semifunctional liver and pulmonary circuit until after
childbirth. The brain continues to grow and its
structures differentiate. Facial features develop, the
body elongates, and the skeleton ossifies. In the
womb, the developing fetus moves, blinks, practices
sucking, and circulates amniotic fluid. The fetus grows
from an embryo measuring approximately 3.3 cm (1.3
in) and weighing 7 g (0.25 oz) to an infant measuring
approximately 51 cm (20 in) and weighing an average
of approximately 3.4 kg (7.5 lbs). Embryonic organ
structures that were primitive and nonfunctional
develop to the point that the newborn can survive in
the outside world.
28.4 Changes During Pregnancy, Labor, and
Birth
Hormones (especially estrogens, progesterone, and
hCG) secreted by the corpus luteum and later by the
placenta are responsible for most of the changes
experienced during pregnancy. Estrogen maintains the
pregnancy, promotes fetal viability, and stimulates
tissue growth in the mother and developing fetus.
Progesterone prevents new ovarian follicles from
developing and suppresses uterine contractility.
Pregnancy weight gain primarily occurs in the breasts
and abdominal region. Nausea, heartburn, and
frequent urination are common during pregnancy.
Maternal blood volume increases by 30 percent during
pregnancy and respiratory minute volume increases by
50 percent. The skin may develop stretch marks and
melanin production may increase.
Toward the late stages of pregnancy, a drop in
progesterone and stretching forces from the fetus lead
to increasing uterine irritability and prompt labor.
Contractions serve to dilate the cervix and expel the
newborn. Delivery of the placenta and associated fetal
membranes follows.
28.5 Adjustments of the Infant at Birth and
Postnatal Stages
The first breath a newborn takes at birth inflates the
lungs and dramatically alters the circulatory system,
closing the three shunts that directed oxygenated
blood away from the lungs and liver during fetal life.
Clamping and cutting the umbilical cord collapses the
three umbilical blood vessels. The proximal umbilical
arteries remain a part of the circulatory system,
whereas the distal umbilical arteries and the umbilical
vein become fibrotic. The newborn keeps warm by
breaking down brown adipose tissue in the process of
nonshivering thermogenesis. The first consumption of
breast milk or formula floods the newborn’s sterile
gastrointestinal tract with beneficial bacteria that
eventually establish themselves as the bacterial flora,
which aid in digestion.
28.6 Lactation
The lactating mother supplies all the hydration and
nutrients that a growing infant needs for the first 4–6
months of life. During pregnancy, the body prepares for
lactation by stimulating the growth and development of
branching lactiferous ducts and alveoli lined with milk-
secreting lactocytes, and by creating colostrum. These
functions are attributable to the actions of several
hormones, including prolactin. Following childbirth,
28 • Chapter Review
1269
suckling triggers oxytocin release, which stimulates
myoepithelial cells to squeeze milk from alveoli. Breast
milk then drains toward the nipple pores to be
consumed by the infant. Colostrum, the milk produced
in the first postpartum days, provides immunoglobulins
that increase the newborn’s immune defenses.
Colostrum, transitional milk, and mature breast milk
are ideally suited to each stage of the newborn’s
development, and breastfeeding helps the newborn’s
digestive system expel meconium and clear bilirubin.
Mature milk changes from the beginning to the end of a
feeding. Foremilk quenches the infant’s thirst, whereas
hindmilk satisfies the infant’s appetite.
28.7 Patterns of Inheritance
There are two aspects to a person’s genetic makeup.
Their genotype refers to the genetic makeup of the
chromosomes found in all their cells and the alleles
that are passed down from their parents. Their
phenotype is the expression of that genotype, based on
the interaction of the paired alleles, as well as how
environmental conditions affect that expression.
Working with pea plants, Mendel discovered that the
factors that account for different traits in parents are
discretely transmitted to offspring in pairs, one from
each parent. He articulated the principles of random
segregation and independent assortment to account
for the inheritance patterns he observed. Mendel’s
factors are genes, with differing variants being referred
to as alleles and those alleles being dominant or
recessive in expression. Each parent passes one allele
for every gene on to offspring, and offspring are equally
likely to inherit any combination of allele pairs. When
Mendel crossed heterozygous individuals, he
repeatedly found a 3:1 dominant–recessive ratio. He
correctly postulated that the expression of the
recessive trait was masked in heterozygotes but would
resurface in their offspring in a predictable manner.
Human genetics focuses on identifying different alleles
and understanding how they express themselves.
Medical researchers are especially interested in the
identification of inheritance patterns for genetic
disorders, which provides the means to estimate the
risk that a given couple’s offspring will inherit a genetic
disease or disorder. Patterns of inheritance in humans
include autosomal dominance and recessiveness, X-
linked dominance and recessiveness, incomplete
dominance, codominance, and lethality. A change in
the nucleotide sequence of DNA, which may or may not
manifest in a phenotype, is called a mutation.
Interactive Link Questions
1. View this time-lapse movie (http://openstax.org/l/
conceptus) of a conceptus starting at day 3. What is
the first structure you see? At what point in the
movie does the blastocoel first appear? What event
occurs at the end of the movie?
2. Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/pregstages) for
a summary of the stages of pregnancy, as
experienced by the pregnant person, and view the
stages of development of the fetus throughout
gestation. At what point in fetal development can a
regular heartbeat be detected?
Review Questions
3. Sperm and ova are similar in terms of ________.
a.
size
b.
quantity produced per year
c.
chromosome number
d.
flagellar motility
4. Although the male ejaculate contains hundreds of
millions of sperm, ________.
a.
most do not reach the oocyte
b.
most are destroyed by the alkaline
environment of the uterus
c.
it takes millions to penetrate the outer layers of
the oocyte
d.
most are destroyed by capacitation
5. As sperm first reach the oocyte, they will contact
the ________.
a.
acrosome
b.
corona radiata
c.
sperm-binding receptors
d.
zona pellucida
6. Fusion of pronuclei occurs during ________.
a.
spermatogenesis
b.
ovulation
c.
fertilization
d.
capacitation
1270
28 • Interactive Link Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
7. Sperm must first complete ________ to enable the
fertilization of an oocyte.
a.
capacitation
b.
the acrosomal reaction
c.
the cortical reaction
d.
the fast block
8. Cleavage produces daughter cells called ________.
a.
trophoblasts
b.
blastocysts
c.
morulae
d.
blastomeres
9. The conceptus, upon reaching the uterus, first
________.
a.
implants
b.
divides
c.
disintegrates
d.
hatches
10. The inner cell mass of the blastocyst is destined to
become the ________.
a.
embryo
b.
trophoblast
c.
chorionic villi
d.
placenta
11. Which primary germ layer gave rise to the cells
that eventually became the central nervous
system?
a.
endoderm
b.
ectoderm
c.
acrosome
d.
mesoderm
12. What would happen if the trophoblast did not
secrete hCG upon implantation of the blastocyst?
a.
The cells would not continue to divide.
b.
The corpus luteum would continue to produce
progesterone and estrogen.
c.
Menses would flush the blastocyst out of the
uterus.
d.
The uterine mucosa would not envelop the
blastocyst.
13. During what process does the amnion envelop the
embryo?
a.
embryonic folding
b.
gastrulation
c.
implantation
d.
organogenesis
14. The placenta is formed from ________.
a.
the embryo’s mesenchymal cells
b.
the mother’s endometrium only
c.
the mother’s endometrium and the embryo’s
chorionic membrane
d.
the mother’s endometrium and the embryo’s
umbilical cord
15. The foramen ovale causes the fetal circulatory
system to bypass the ________.
a.
liver
b.
lungs
c.
kidneys
d.
gonads
16. What happens to the urine excreted by the fetus
when the kidneys begin to function?
a.
The umbilical cord carries it to the placenta
for removal.
b.
The endometrium absorbs it.
c.
It adds to the amniotic fluid.
d.
It is turned into meconium.
17. During weeks 9–12 of fetal development,
________.
a.
bone marrow begins to assume erythrocyte
production
b.
meconium begins to accumulate in the
intestines
c.
surfactant production begins in the fetal lungs
d.
the spinal cord begins to be myelinated
18. Progesterone secreted by the placenta
suppresses ________ to prevent maturation of
ovarian follicles.
a.
LH and estrogen
b.
hCG and FSH
c.
FSH and LH
d.
estrogen and hCG
19. Which of the following is a possible culprit of
“morning sickness”?
a.
increased minute respiration
b.
decreased intestinal peristalsis
c.
decreased aldosterone secretion
d.
increased blood volume
20. How does the decrease in progesterone at the last
weeks of pregnancy help to bring on labor?
a.
stimulating FSH production
b.
decreasing the levels of estrogens
c.
dilating the cervix
d.
decreasing the inhibition of uterine
contractility
28 • Review Questions
1271
21. Which of these fetal presentations is the easiest
for vaginal birth?
a.
complete breech
b.
vertex occiput anterior
c.
frank breech
d.
vertex occiput posterior
22. Which of these shunts exists between the right
and left atria?
a.
foramen ovale
b.
ductus venosus
c.
ductus arteriosis
d.
foramen venosus
23. Why is brown fat important?
a.
It is the newborn’s primary source of
insulation.
b.
It can be broken down to generate heat for
thermoregulation.
c.
It can be broken down for energy between
feedings.
d.
It can be converted to white fat.
24. Constriction of umbilical blood vessels during
vaginal birth ________.
a.
causes respiratory alkalosis
b.
inhibits the respiratory center in the brain
c.
elevates carbon dioxide levels in the blood
d.
both a and b
25. Alveoli are connected to the lactiferous sinuses by
________.
a.
lactocytes
b.
lactiferous ducts
c.
nipple pores
d.
lobules
26. How is colostrum most important to a newborn?
a.
It helps boost the newborn’s immune system.
b.
It provides much needed fat.
c.
It satisfies the newborn’s thirst.
d.
It satisfies the infant’s appetite.
27. Mature breast milk ________.
a.
has more sodium than cow’s milk
b.
has more calcium than cow’s milk
c.
has more protein than cow’s milk
d.
has more fat than cow’s milk
28. Marfan syndrome is inherited in an autosomal
dominant pattern. Which of the following is true?
a.
Female offspring are more likely to be carriers
of the disease.
b.
Male offspring are more likely to inherit the
disease.
c.
Male and female offspring have the same
likelihood of inheriting the disease.
d.
Female offspring are more likely to inherit the
disease.
29. In addition to codominance, the ABO blood group
antigens are also an example of ________.
a.
incomplete dominance
b.
X-linked recessive inheritance
c.
multiple alleles
d.
recessive lethal inheritance
30. Zoe has cystic fibrosis. Which of the following is
the most likely explanation?
a.
Zoe probably inherited one faulty allele from
her father, who is a carrier, and one normal
allele from her mother.
b.
Zoe probably inherited one faulty allele from
her mother, who must also have cystic
fibrosis, and one normal allele from her
father.
c.
Zoe must have inherited faulty alleles from
both parents, both of whom must also have
cystic fibrosis.
d.
Zoe must have inherited faulty alleles from
both parents, both of whom are carriers.
Critical Thinking Questions
31. Darcy and Raul are having difficulty conceiving a
child. Darcy ovulates every 28 days, and Raul’s
sperm count is normal. If we could observe Raul’s
sperm about an hour after ejaculation, however,
we’d see that they appear to be moving only
sluggishly. When Raul’s sperm eventually
encounter Darcy’s oocyte, they appear to be
incapable of generating an adequate acrosomal
reaction. Which process has probably gone
wrong?
32. On Saturday night, a female has unprotected sex
with a male. On Tuesday morning, she experiences
the twinge of mid-cycle pain that she typically
feels when she is ovulating. This makes her
extremely anxious that she might soon learn she is
pregnant. Is the concern valid? Why or why not?
33. Approximately 3 weeks after her last menstrual
period, a sexually active woman experiences a
brief episode of abdominopelvic cramping and
minor bleeding. What might be the explanation?
1272
28 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
34. The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of
Medicine recommends that all people who might
become pregnant consume at least 400 µg/day of
folate from supplements or fortified foods. Why?
35. What is the physiological benefit of incorporating
shunts into the fetal circulatory system?
36. Why would a premature infant require
supplemental oxygen?
37. Devin is 35 weeks pregnant with their first child
when they begin experiencing diffuse, mild
contractions for several hours. Examination
reveals, however, that the plug of mucus blocking
their cervix is intact and the cervix has not yet
begun to dilate. Devin is advised to return home.
Why?
38. Janine is 41 weeks pregnant with her first child
when she arrives at the birthing unit reporting that
she believes she has been in labor “for days” but
that “it’s just not going anywhere.” During the
clinical exam, she experiences a few mild
contractions, each lasting about 15–20 seconds;
however, her cervix is found to be only 2 cm
dilated, and the amniotic sac is intact. Janine is
admitted to the birthing unit and an IV infusion of
pitocin is started. Why?
39. Describe how the newborn’s first breath alters the
circulatory pattern.
40. Newborns are at much higher risk for dehydration
than adults. Why?
41. Describe the transit of breast milk from lactocytes
to nipple pores.
42. A person who stopped breastfeeding suddenly is
experiencing breast engorgement and leakage,
just like they did in the first few weeks of
breastfeeding. Why?
43. Explain why it was essential that Mendel perform
his crosses using a large sample size?
44. How can a female carrier of an X-linked recessive
disorder have a female child who is affected?
28 • Critical Thinking Questions
1273
1274
28 • Critical Thinking Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
REFERENCES
3.2 The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
Kolata, G. Severe diet doesn’t prolong life, at least in monkeys. New York Times [Internet]. 2012
Aug. 29 [cited 2013 Jan 21]; Available from:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/30/science/low-calorie-diet-doesnt-prolong-life-study-of-
monkeys-finds.html?_r=2&ref=caloricrestriction& (http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/30/
science/low-calorie-diet-doesnt-prolong-life-study-of-monkeys-
finds.html?_r=2&ref=caloricrestriction&)
4.5 Nervous Tissue Mediates Perception and Response
Stern, P. Focus issue: getting excited about glia. Science [Internet]. 2010 [cited 2012 Dec 4];
3(147):330-773. Available from:
http://stke.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/sigtrans;3/147/eg11
(http://stke.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/sigtrans;3/147/eg11)
Ming GL, Song H. Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 2005 [cited 2012 Dec 4]; 28:223–250.
4.6 Tissue Injury and Aging
Emerson, RW. Old age. Atlantic. 1862 [cited 2012 Dec 4]; 9(51):134–140.
5.3 Functions of the Integumentary System
American Academy of Dermatology (US). Tattoos and body piercings [Internet]. Schaumburg, IL;
c2013 [cited 2012 Nov 1]. Available from: http://www.aad.org/media-resources/stats-and-
facts/prevention-and-care/tattoos-and-body-piercings/ (http://www.aad.org/media-
resources/stats-and-facts/prevention-and-care/tattoos-and-body-piercings/).
5.4 Diseases, Disorders, and Injuries of the Integumentary System
American Cancer Society (US). Skin cancer: basal and squamous cell [Internet]. c2013 [cited
2012 Nov 1]. Available from: http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/cid/documents/webcontent/
003139-pdf.pdf (http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/cid/documents/webcontent/
003139-pdf.pdf).
Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital at Stanford (US). Classification and treatment of burns
[Internet]. Palo Alto (CA). c2012 [cited 2012 Nov 1]. Available from:
https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=classification-of-burns-90-P09575
(https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=classification-of-burns-90-P09575).
Mayo Clinic (US). Basal cell carcinoma [Internet]. Scottsdale (AZ); c2012 [cited 2012 Nov 1].
Available from: http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/basal-cell-carcinoma/ds00925/
dsection=treatments-and-drugs (http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/basal-cell-carcinoma/
ds00925/dsection=treatments-and-drugs).
Beck, J. FYI: how much can a human body sweat before it runs out? Popular Science [Internet].
New York (NY); c2012 [cited 2012 Nov 1]. Available from: http://www.popsci.com/science/
article/2011-01/fyi-how-much-can-human-body-sweat-it-runs-out
(http://www.popsci.com/science/article/2011-01/fyi-how-much-can-human-body-sweat-it-
runs-out).
References
1275
Skin Cancer Foundation (US). Skin cancer facts [Internet]. New York (NY); c2013 [cited 2012 Nov
1]. Available from: http://www.skincancer.org/skin-cancer-information/skin-cancer-
facts#top (http://www.skincancer.org/skin-cancer-information/skin-cancer-facts#top).
7.2 The Skull
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US). Injury prevention and control: traumatic brain
injury [Internet]. Atlanta, GA; [cited 2013 Mar 18]. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/
traumaticbraininjury/statistics.html (https://www.cdc.gov/TraumaticBrainInjury/data/
index.html).
12.1 Basic Structure and Function of the Nervous System
Kramer, PD. Listening to prozac. 1st ed. New York (NY): Penguin Books; 1993.
18.6 Blood Typing
Garratty G, Glynn SA, McEntire R; Retrovirus Epidemiology Donor Study. ABO and Rh(D)
phenotype frequencies of different racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Transfusion.
Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15104651/
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15104651/)https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15104651/
19.4 Cardiac Physiology
Spreeuw, J., & Owadally, I. (2013). Investigating the Broken-Heart Effect: A Model for Short-
Term Dependence between the Remaining Lifetimes of Joint Lives. Annals of Actuarial
Science. Available from: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/annals-of-actuarial-
science/article/abs/investigating-the-brokenheart-effect-a-model-for-shortterm-
dependence-between-the-remaining-lifetimes-of-joint-lives/
CE4BCF96E671F09B44259F0ED7E8216A (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/
annals-of-actuarial-science/article/abs/investigating-the-brokenheart-effect-a-model-for-
shortterm-dependence-between-the-remaining-lifetimes-of-joint-lives/
CE4BCF96E671F09B44259F0ED7E8216A)
20.4 Homeostatic Regulation of the Vascular System
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US). Getting blood pressure under control: high
blood pressure is out of control for too many Americans [Internet]. Atlanta (GA); [cited 2013
Apr 26]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/facts.htm
(https://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/facts.htm)
21.7 Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
Robinson J, Mistry K, McWilliam H, Lopez R, Parham P, Marsh SG. Nucleic acid research. IMGT/
HLA Database [Internet]. 2011 [cited 2013 Apr 1]; 39:D1171–1176. Available from:
http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/21071412 (http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/
21071412)
Robinson J, Malik A, Parham P, Bodmer JG, Marsh SG. Tissue antigens. IMGT/HLA Database
[Internet]. 2000 [cited 2013 Apr 1]; 55(3):280–287. Available from:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10777106/ (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10777106/)
22.1 Organs and Structures of the Respiratory System
Bizzintino J, Lee WM, Laing IA, Vang F, Pappas T, Zhang G, Martin AC, Khoo SK, Cox DW,
Geelhoed GC, et al. Association between human rhinovirus C and severity of acute asthma in
children. Eur Respir J [Internet]. 2010 [cited 2013 Mar 22]; 37(5):1037–1042. Available
from: https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/37/5/1037 (https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/
1276
References
Access for free at openstax.org
37/5/1037)
Kumar V, Ramzi S, Robbins SL. Robbins Basic Pathology. 7th ed. Philadelphia (PA): Elsevier Ltd;
2005.
Martin RJ, Kraft M, Chu HW, Berns, EA, Cassell GH. A link between chronic asthma and chronic
infection. J Allergy Clin Immunol [Internet]. 2001 [cited 2013 Mar 22]; 107(4):595-601.
Available from: http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(01)31561-0/fulltext
(http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(01)31561-0/fulltext)
23.3 The Mouth, Pharynx, and Esophagus
van Loon FPL, Holmes SJ, Sirotkin B, Williams W, Cochi S, Hadler S, Lindegren ML. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report: Mumps surveillance -- United States, 1988–1993 [Internet].
Atlanta, GA: Center for Disease Control; [cited 2013 Apr 3]. Available from:
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00038546.htm (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/00038546.htm).
23.5 The Small and Large Intestines
American Cancer Society (US). Cancer facts and figures: colorectal cancer: 2011–2013
[Internet]. c2013 [cited 2013 Apr 3]. Available from: http://www.cancer.org/Research/
CancerFactsFigures/ColorectalCancerFactsFigures/colorectal-cancer-facts-
figures-2011-2013-page (http://www.cancer.org/Research/CancerFactsFigures/
ColorectalCancerFactsFigures/colorectal-cancer-facts-figures-2011-2013-page).
The Nutrition Source. Fiber and colon cancer: following the scientific trail [Internet]. Boston
(MA): Harvard School of Public Health; c2012 [cited 2013 Apr 3]. Available from:
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/carbohydrates/fiber/
(https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/carbohydrates/fiber/).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US). Morbidity and mortality weekly report:
notifiable diseases and mortality tables [Internet]. Atlanta (GA); [cited 2013 Apr 3]. Available
from: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6101md.htm?s_cid=mm6101md_w (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6101md.htm?s_cid=mm6101md_w).
25.10 The Urinary System and Homeostasis
Bagul A, Frost JH, Drage M. Stem cells and their role in renal ischaemia reperfusion injury. Am J
Nephrol [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2013 Apr 15]; 37(1):16–29. Available from:
http://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/345731 (http://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/
345731)
References
1277
1278
References
Access for free at openstax.org
INDEX
Symbols
α-dextrin
1040
α-dextrinase
1040
A
abdominal aorta
846
abdominopelvic cavity
27
abducens nerve
522
abduct
400
Abduction
330
abductor
403
abductor digiti minimi
430
abductor pollicis brevis
430
abductor pollicis longus
428
ABO blood group
740
absolute refractory period
474
absorption
1003
absorptive state
1087
accessory digestive organ
997
accessory duct
1035
Acclimatization
982
accommodation
640
accommodation–convergence
reflex
640
acetabular labrum
337
acetabulum
287
acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA)
1069
acetylcholine (ACh)
364, 597
acid
58
acinus
1035
Acne
182
acromegaly
678
acromial end of the clavicle
276
acromial process
277
acromioclavicular joint
277
acromion
277
acrosomal reaction
1224
acrosome
1224
actin
361
action potential
364, 466
activation energy
54
activation gate
474
Active immunity
925
active transport
85
Acute inflammation
911
Acute mountain sickness (AMS)
982
adaptive immune response
897
adduction
330
adductor
403
adductor brevis
435
adductor longus
435
adductor magnus
435
adductor pollicis
430
adductor tubercle
292
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
15, 65
adenylyl cyclase
669
Adipocytes
142
Adipose tissue
142
adrenal artery
853
adrenal cortex
688
adrenal glands
688
adrenal medulla
594, 688
adrenal vein
872
adrenergic
597
adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)
679
Aerobic respiration
370
afferent branch
599
afferent lymphatic vessels
902
afterbirth
1249
Afterload
797
agglutination
739
agonist
396, 612
agranular leukocytes
730
ala
948
alar cartilage
949
alar plate
509
alarm reaction
689
Albinism
171
Albumin
714
Aldosterone
689
alimentary canal
997
Alkaloids
544
allantois
1233
allele
1256
alpha (α)-adrenergic receptor
597
alpha cell
694
Alveolar dead space
967
alveolar duct
956
alveolar macrophage
957
alveolar pores
956
Alveolar process of the mandible
242
alveolar process of the maxilla
240
alveolar sac
956
alveoli
1210
alveolus
956
amacrine cells
554
amino acid
68
aminopeptidase
1041
amnion
1232
amniotic cavity
1232
amphiarthrosis
315
amphipathic
82
ampulla
550, 1205
amygdala
502
Anabolic hormones
1061
anabolic reactions
1061
anabolism
14, 14
anagen
174
anal canal
1028
anal column
1030
anal sinus
1030
anal triangle
420
Anaphase
110
Anaphylactic shock
842
anastomosis
768
anatomical dead space
967
anatomical neck
278
anatomical position
23
anatomical sphincter
1116
anatomy
8
anchoring junction
132
anconeus
426
anemia
725
angioblasts
879
angiogenesis
379, 879
angiotensin I
1123
Angiotensin II
1123
angiotensin-converting enzyme
689
angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE)
1123
Index
1279
angiotensinogen
1123
angle of the mandible
242
angle of the rib
260
anion
47
ankle joint
295
annular ligament
336
anosmia
545
antagonist
396, 612
Anterior
24
anterior (ventral) sacral foramen
255
anterior arch
253
anterior border of the tibia
294
anterior cardiac veins
770
anterior cerebral artery
849
anterior columns
510
anterior communicating artery
849
anterior compartment of the arm
426
anterior compartment of the
forearm
428
anterior compartment of the leg
438
anterior compartment of the
thigh
436
anterior corticospinal tract
576
anterior cranial fossa
232
anterior cruciate ligament
340
anterior horn
509
anterior inferior iliac spine
286
anterior interventricular artery
768
anterior interventricular sulcus
757
anterior longitudinal ligament
257
anterior median fissure
509
anterior sacroiliac ligament
287
anterior scalene
414
anterior spinal artery
512
anterior superior iliac spine
286
anterior talofibular ligament
343
anterior tibial artery
859
anterior tibial vein
874
anterograde amnesia
632
antibodies
714
antibody
898
anticholinergic drugs
613
anticoagulant
738
anticodon
105
antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
676,
1165
antigen
898
antigen presentation
914
Antigen processing
914
antigen receptor
918
antigenic determinant
913
Antithrombin
738
antrum
1201
anulus fibrosus
256
anuria
1112
aorta
846
aortic arch
846
aortic hiatus
846
aortic sinuses
835
aortic valve
765
apex
948
aphasia
633
apical
130
apical ectodermal ridge
297
apneustic center
968
Apocrine secretion
139
apocrine sweat gland
176
aponeurosis
360
Apoptosis
151
appendicular
403
appendicular skeleton
229
appendix
1027
aquaporin
1124
aqueous humor
554
arachnoid granulations
514
arachnoid mater
513
arachnoid trabeculae
513
arcuate line of the ilium
286
areola
1210
Areolar tissue
143
arm
278
arrector pili
174
arterial circle
849
arteriole
814
arteriovenous anastomosis
816
artery
813
articular capsule
321
articular cartilage
198, 321
articular disc
322
Articular tubercle
234
articulation
198, 314
artificial pacemaker
783
ascending aorta
846
ascending colon
1028
ascending pathway
559
Ascending tracts
510
association area
567
Astrocyte
150, 461
ataxia
651
atlanto-occipital joint
333
atlantoaxial joint
333
atlas
253
Atmospheric pressure
962
atom
41
atomic number
42
ATP synthase
1071
ATPase
369
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
697
atrial reflex
793, 836
atrioventricular (AV) node
775
atrioventricular bundle
775
atrioventricular bundle branches
775
atrioventricular septum
760
atrioventricular valves
760
atrium
754
atrophy
152, 378
audition
546
auricle
546, 757
auricular surface of the ilium
286
autocrine
664
autolysis
94
autonomic nervous system (ANS)
456
autonomic tone
606, 790
Autophagy
94
autorhythmicity
383, 772
autosomal chromosomes
1256
autosomal dominant
1259
autosomal recessive
1260
axial
403
axial skeleton
228
axillary artery
857
axillary nerve
525
axillary vein
869
axis
253
axon
453
axon hillock
459
axon segment
459
1280
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
axon terminal
459
axoplasm
459
azygos vein
865
B
B cells
898
B lymphocytes
731
Babinski sign
647
Bachmann’s bundle
774
bacterial flora
1030
Bainbridge reflex
793
ball-and-socket joint
325
baroreceptor
600
baroreceptor reflex
792
Barrier defenses
897
Bartholin’s glands
1197
basal cell
165
Basal cell carcinoma
180
basal forebrain
500
basal lamina
130
basal metabolic rate (BMR)
1093
basal nuclei
500
basal plate
509
base
59
base of the metatarsal bone
296
basement membrane
130
basilar artery
512, 849
basilar membrane
547
basilic vein
869
Basophils
730
bedsore
185
belly
398
beta (β)-adrenergic receptor
597
beta (β)-hydroxybutyrate
1079
beta (β)-oxidation
1077
beta cell
694
Betz cells
574
bi
403
biaxial joint
316
biceps brachii
426
biceps femoris
437
bicipital groove
278
bicuspid valve
765
Bile
1034
bile canaliculus
1034
bile salts
1076
bilirubin
723, 1034
biliverdin
723
binocular depth cues
567
biogenic amine
480
biosynthesis reactions
1061
bipennate
399
Bipolar
460
bipolar cells
554
blastocoel
1228
blastocyst
1228
blastomere
1228
blood
711
blood colloidal osmotic pressure
(BCOP)
831
Blood flow
821
Blood hydrostatic pressure
831
blood islands
879
blood pressure
821
blood-brain barrier (BBB)
462
blood–testis barrier
1189
body
1017
body mass index (BMI)
1095
body of the rib
260
body of uterus
1206
Bohr effect
978
bolus
1007
bond
47
Bone
191
bone marrow
899
bone marrow biopsy
718
bone marrow transplant
719
Bowman’s capsule
1119
Boyle’s law
962
brachial artery
857
brachial plexus
525
brachial vein
869
brachialis
426
brachiocephalic vein
864
brachioradialis
426
brain
452
brain case
229
brain stem
495
Braxton Hicks contractions
1247
brevis
403
bridge
948
broad ligament
1198
Broca’s area
501, 573
Brodmann’s areas
501
bronchi
955
bronchial artery
851
bronchial bud
983
bronchial tree
955
bronchial vein
865
bronchiole
955
bronchoconstriction
960
bronchodilation
960
Bronchus-associated lymphoid
tissue (BALT)
905
brown adipose tissue
1251
bruise
724
brush border
1024, 1124
buccinator
404
buffer
60
buffy coat
712
bulbourethral glands
1192
bulbus cordis
800
bundle of His
775
bursa
322
C
calcaneal tendon
439
calcaneofibular ligament
343
calcaneus
295
calcitonin
684
callus
185
calmodulin
384
Calorie
1093
calvaria
232
calyces
1118
canaliculi
201
capacitance
819
capacitance vessels
819
capacitation
1224
capillary
814
capillary bed
816
capillary hydrostatic pressure
(CHP)
831
capitate
280
capitulum
279
capsaicin
551
carbaminohemoglobin
722, 980
carbohydrate
62
Carbonic anhydrase (CA)
980
cardia
1016
cardiac accelerator nerves
609
cardiac cycle
784
Cardiac muscle
148, 359
cardiac notch
752, 959
Cardiac output (CO)
788
cardiac plexus
790
cardiac reflexes
792
cardiac reserve
789
cardiac skeleton
760
Index
1281
cardiogenic area
800
cardiogenic cords
800
Cardiogenic shock
841
cardiomyocyte
768
cardiovascular center
609
Carotid canal
234, 246, 512
carotid sinuses
835
carpal bone
278
carpal tunnel
282
carpometacarpal joint
282
carrier
1260
cartilage
191
cartilaginous joint
314
Catabolic hormones
1061
Catabolic reactions
1058
catabolism
14, 14
catagen
174
catalyst
54
cation
47
cauda equina
509
caudal
25
caudate
502
caval opening
418
cavernous sinus
867
cecum
1027
celiac ganglion
593
celiac trunk
853
cell
10
cell cycle
107
cell junction
130
cell membrane
82
cellular respiration
1063
cementum
1011
central canal
203, 515
central chemoreceptor
969
central nervous system (CNS)
452
central neuron
591
central sulcus
500
Central tolerance
921
central vein
1034
centriole
97
centromere
108
centrosome
110
cephalic flexure
496
cephalic phase
1020
cephalic vein
869
cerebellum
508
cerebral aqueduct
515
cerebral cortex
466, 500
cerebral hemisphere
500
cerebral peduncles
574
cerebrocerebellum
650
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
462
cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
848
cerebrum
500
cervical curve
250
cervical enlargement
576
cervical plexus
525
cervical vertebrae
252
cervix
1206
channel protein
83
check reflex
651
checkpoint
110
chemical digestion
1003
Chemical energy
51
chemical synapse
478
chemokine
909
chemoreceptor
541
chief cells
1018
chief sensory nucleus
561
chloride shift
980
cholecystokinin (CCK)
1076
cholinergic
597
cholinergic system
479
chondrocytes
145
chordae tendineae
763
chorion
1233
chorionic membrane
1235
chorionic villi
1235
choroid
554
choroid plexus
463, 516
chromaffin
690
chromaffin cells
595
chromatin
100
chromosome
100
Chronic inflammation
911
chyle
896
chylomicron
1045
chylomicrons
1076
chyme
1003
chymotrypsin
1082
chymotrypsinogen
1082
Cilia
97
ciliary body
554
ciliary ganglion
595
circadian rhythm
564
circle of Willis
512, 849
Circular
399
circular fold
1024
circulatory shock
841
Circumduction
330
circumflex artery
768
cisterna chyli
897
citric acid cycle
1065
clasp-knife response
648
Class switching
923
clavicle
275
clavicular notch
259
cleavage
1228
cleavage furrow
110
clitoris
1197
clonal anergy
921
clonal deletion
921
clonal expansion
918
Clonal selection
918
clone
918
closed reduction
212
Clotting
152
clotting factors
735
coagulation
734
coccyx
228
cochlea
546
cochlear duct
546
Codominance
1263
codon
104
Collagen fiber
142
Collateral ganglia
593
colloid
56, 681
colon
1028
Colony-stimulating factors
(CSFs)
718
colostrum
1254
common bile duct
1034
common carotid arteries
512
common carotid artery
848
common hepatic artery
853
common hepatic duct
1034
common iliac artery
853
common iliac vein
874
common pathway
737
compact bone
197
complement
909
Compliance
825
compound
41, 47
compressor urethrae
420
1282
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
Computed tomography (CT)
29
concentration
54
concentration gradient
85
concentric contraction
372
conceptus
1228
conducting zone
948
Conduction
1093
Conduction aphasia
633
conductive hearing
638
condylar process of the
mandible
242
condyle
242
condyloid joint
325
cone photoreceptor
555
conjugate gaze
639
Connective tissue
126
connective tissue membrane
129
Connective tissue proper
141
constant region domain
913
continuous capillary
815
continuous conduction
475
Contractility
358
contraction phase
375
contralateral
559
control center
20
Convection
1093
convergence
640
convergent
399
coordination exam
626
coracobrachialis
425
coracoclavicular ligament
277
coracohumeral ligament
335
coracoid process
277
corn
185
cornea
554
corneal reflex
578
corona radiata
1224
coronal suture
239
Coronary arteries
768
coronary sinus
763
coronary sulcus
757
Coronary veins
770
coronoid fossa
279
coronoid process of the
mandible
242
coronoid process of the ulna
279
corpus albicans
1205
corpus callosum
500
corpus cavernosum
1193
corpus luteum
1205
corpus spongiosum
1193
corrugator supercilii
404
cortex
173
cortical nephrons
1120
cortical reaction
1225
cortico-ponto-cerebellar
pathway
650
corticobulbar tract
574
corticospinal tract
574
cortisol
689
costal cartilage
260
costal facet
254
costal groove
260
costoclavicular ligament
276
countercurrent multiplier system
1135
covalent bond
49
coxal bone
285
cranial
24
cranial cavity
27, 232
cranial nerve
519
cranial nerve exam
626
cranial nerve ganglion
519
craniosacral system
595
cranium
229
Creatine phosphate
369
cribriform plate
237
cricoid cartilage
952
crista galli
237
crown
1011
cuboid
295
cupula
550
cuspids
1010
cutaneous membrane
130
cuticle
173
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)
669
cyclin
111
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
111
cystic artery
853
cystic duct
1036
cytoarchitecture
630
cytokine
909
Cytokines
718
Cytokinesis
108
cytoplasm
91
cytoskeleton
97
Cytosol
91
Cytotoxic T cells (Tc)
920
D
Dalton’s law
970
deciduous teeth
1010
decomposition reaction
53
decussates
559
Deep
25
deep anterior compartment
428
deep femoral artery
859
deep femoral vein
874
deep posterior compartment of
the forearm
428
deep tendon reflex
647
deep transverse perineal
420
defecation
1003
defensins
730
deglutition
408, 1015
dehydration
1163
Delayed hypersensitivity
932
delta cell
694
deltoid
425
deltoid ligament
343
deltoid tuberosity
278
Denaturation
70
dendrite
453
dens
253
dense body
384
dense connective tissue
141
dentes
1010
dentin
1011
dentition
1010
deoxyhemoglobin
722
deoxyribonuclease
1042
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
72
depolarization
472
depolarize
364
Depression
331
dermal papilla
165
dermis
167
descending aorta
846
descending colon
1028
descending tracts
510
desmosome
166, 382
detrusor muscle
1115
Development
16
diabetes mellitus
696
diacylglycerol (DAG)
670
Index
1283
diapedesis
728
diaphragm
417
diaphysis
197
diarthrosis
315
diastole
784
diastolic pressure
821
diencephalon
495
differentiation
16
Diffusion
85
digastric
410
digital arteries
857
digital veins
869
dihydroxyvitamin D
1171
dilation
1247
dipeptidase
1041
diploë
198
diploid
107
diplopia
640
direct pathway
503
disaccharide
63
disinhibition
503
Distal
25
distal convoluted tubules
1120
distal radioulnar joint
280
distal tibiofibular joint
295
disulfide bond
70
Diuresis
1165
diuretic
1141
DNA polymerase
102
DNA replication
101
dominant
1257
Dominant lethal
1264
dorsal
24
dorsal (posterior) cavity
26
dorsal (posterior) nerve root
509
dorsal (posterior) root ganglion
518
dorsal arch
859
dorsal column system
559
dorsal group
439
dorsal interossei
430
dorsal longitudinal fasciculus
608
dorsal nucleus of the vagus
nerve
595
dorsal respiratory group (DRG)
968
dorsal stream
569
dorsal venous arch
874
dorsalis pedis artery
859
Dorsiflexion
331
dorsum nasi
948
downregulation
671
ductus arteriosus
879, 1241
ductus deferens
1191
ductus venosus
879, 1241
duodenal glands
1025
duodenum
1023
dura mater
513
dural sinuses
513
E
ear ossicles
228
early induced immune response
909
eccentric contraction
372
eccrine sweat gland
176
ectoderm
127, 1233
ectopic pregnancy
1231
Eczema
182
edema
628
Edinger–Westphal nucleus
595
effector
20
effector protein
480
effector T cells
919
efferent arteriole
1119
efferent branch
599
efferent lymphatic vessels
902
ejaculatory duct
1192
ejection fraction
789
elastase
1082
elastic artery
813
Elastic cartilage
145
Elastic fiber
142
elasticity
358
Elastin fibers
168
elbow joint
279, 336
electrical gradient
88
electrical synapse
478
electrocardiogram (ECG)
778
electrochemical exclusion
469
electron
41
electron shell
45
electron transport chain (ETC)
1070
eleidin
167
element
40
elevation
331
embolus
627, 739
embryo
1228
embryonic folding
1237
emigration
728
enamel
1011
encapsulated ending
541
end diastolic volume (EDV)
785
end systolic volume (ESV)
785
endocardial tubes
800
endocardium
759
endochondral ossification
207
endocrine gland
137, 663
endocrine system
662
Endocytosis
88
endoderm
127, 1233
endogenous
597
endogenous chemical
610
endometrium
1207
endomysium
360
endoneurium
520
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
92
endosteum
197
Endothelins
1139
endothelium
133, 759
energy-consuming phase
1066
energy-yielding phase
1066
enteric nervous system
518
enteric nervous system (ENS)
456
enteric plexus
520
enteroendocrine cells
1018
enterohepatic circulation
1034
enterokinase
1082
enteropeptidase
1036
enzyme
54
Eosinophils
730
ependymal cell
462
epiblast
1232
epicardial coronary arteries
768
epicardium
756
epicranial aponeurosis
404
epidermis
164
epididymis
1191
epiglottis
953
epimysium
359
epinephrine
597, 690
epineurium
520
epiphyseal line
210
epiphyseal plate
197
epiphysis
197
1284
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
epiploic appendages
1029
episiotomy
1249
episodic memory
632
epithalamus
505
epithelial membrane
129
Epithelial tissue
126
eponychium
175
equilibrium
550
erector spinae group
413
erythroblastosis fetalis
934
erythrocyte
719
erythropoietin (EPO)
698, 717
esophageal artery
851
esophageal plexus
520
esophageal vein
865
esophagus
1013
estrogens
692
ethmoid air cell
246
ethmoid bone
237
Evaporation
1093
eversion
331
exchange reaction
53
excitability
357
excitable membrane
468
excitation-contraction coupling
362
excitatory postsynaptic potential
(EPSP)
477
executive functions
571
exocrine gland
137
exocrine system
663
exocytosis
89
exogenous
597
exogenous chemical
610
exon
104
expiration
964
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
965
expressive aphasia
633
expulsion
1249
extensibility
358
extension
329
extensor
403
extensor carpi radialis brevis
428
extensor carpi ulnaris
428
extensor digiti minimi
428
extensor digitorum
428
extensor digitorum brevis
439
extensor digitorum longus
438
extensor hallucis longus
438
extensor indicis
429
extensor pollicis brevis
428
extensor pollicis longus
429
extensor radialis longus
428
extensor retinaculum
429
External acoustic meatus
234
external anal sphincter
1029
external callus
214
external carotid artery
848
external ear
546
external elastic membrane
813
external iliac artery
854
external iliac vein
874
external intercostal
419
external jugular vein
866
external nose
948
external oblique
416
external occipital protuberance
236
External respiration
973
external root sheath
174
external urinary sphincter
1114
exteroceptor
541
Extracellular fluid (ECF)
83,
1157
extraocular muscles
522, 553
extrapyramidal system
576
extrinsic eye muscles
405
extrinsic ligament
321
extrinsic muscles of the hand
428
extrinsic muscles of the tongue
642
extrinsic pathway
737
F
facet
254
facial bones
229
facial nerve
522
Facilitated diffusion
86
FADH2
1063
false ribs
260
fas ligand
908
fascicle
360, 397
fascicles
520
fasciculation
648
fasciculus cuneatus
559
fasciculus gracilis
559
fast glycolytic (FG)
377
Fast oxidative (FO)
377
fatty acid oxidation
1077
fauces
641, 952, 1006
Fc region
921
feces
1031
femoral artery
859
femoral circumflex vein
874
femoral nerve
525
femoral triangle
435
femoral vein
874
femoropatellar joint
339
femur
290
fenestrated capillary
815
fenestrations
1122
ferritin
723
Fertilization
1223
fertilization membrane
1225
fetus
1228
fibrillation
648
fibrin
734
Fibrinogen
714
Fibrinolysis
737
fibroblast
142
Fibrocartilage
145
fibrocyte
142
fibroelastic membrane
954
fibrosis
386
fibrous joint
314
fibrous tunic
554
fibula
290
fibular collateral ligament
340
fibular nerve
525
fibular notch
294
fibular vein
874
fibularis brevis
439
fibularis longus
439
fibularis tertius
438
fight-or-flight response
590
filling time
796
filtration
831
filtration slits
1121
fimbriae
1205
first messenger
669
first-degree burn
184
fixator
396
flaccid paralysis
648
flaccidity
647
flagellum
97
flat bone
196
Index
1285
flatus
1031
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
1063
Flexion
329, 396
flexor
403
flexor carpi radialis
428
flexor carpi ulnaris
428
flexor digiti minimi brevis
430
flexor digitorum longus
439
flexor digitorum profundus
428
flexor digitorum superficialis
428
flexor hallucis longus
439
flexor pollicis brevis
430
flexor pollicis longus
428
flexor retinaculum
282, 429
floating ribs
260
flocculonodular lobe
650
fluid compartment
1157
fluid connective tissue
141
follicle
1199
follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH)
679
folliculogenesis
1201
fontanelle
260
fontanelles
317
foot
290
Foramen lacerum
246
foramen magnum
236, 512
foramen ovale
760, 879, 1241
Foramen ovale of the middle
cranial fossa
246
Foramen rotundum
246
Foramen spinosum
246
forced breathing
965
forearm
278
forebrain
495
foregut
983
foremilk
1255
formed elements
712
forming urine
1121
fossa
277
fossa ovalis
760
fourth ventricle
515
fourth-degree burn
184
fovea
554
fovea capitis
290
fracture
212
fracture hematoma
214
Frank-Starling mechanism
796
free nerve ending
540
frontal bone
235
frontal eye fields
501, 573
frontal lobe
500
frontal plane
25
frontal sinus
246
frontalis
404
functional group
61
functional residual capacity
(FRC)
966
fundus
1017, 1206
fusiform
398
G
G cells
1018
G protein
480, 669
G protein–coupled receptor
597
G0 phase
108
G1 phase
108
G2 phase
108
gait
650
gait exam
626
gallbladder
1036
gamete
1186
ganglion
453
ganglionic neuron
593
gap junction
132
gastric emptying
1021
gastric gland
1018
gastric phase
1020
gastric pits
1018
gastric plexuses
520
gastrin
1018
gastrocnemius
439
gastrocolic reflex
1031
gastroileal reflex
1026
gastrulation
1233
gated
469
gene
103
Gene expression
103
general adaptation syndrome
(GAS)
689
general sense
542
generator potential
476
genicular artery
859
genioglossus
409
geniohyoid
410
genome
102
genotype
1256
Germinal centers
901
gestation
1228
gigantism
678
Gingivae
1011
glabella
235
glans penis
1193
glassy membrane
174
glenohumeral joint
276, 335
glenohumeral ligament
335
glenoid cavity
276
glenoid labrum
335
glial cell
452
globin
722
globulins
714
globus pallidus
502
glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
1126
glomerulus
1119
glossopharyngeal nerve
522
glottis
953
glucagon
694
glucocorticoids
689
Glucokinase
1066
Gluconeogenesis
1072
glucose-6-phosphate
1066
gluteal group
432
gluteal tuberosity
291
gluteus maximus
432
gluteus medius
432
gluteus minimus
432
glycocalyx
84
glycogen
1088
Glycolysis
370, 1064
glycoprotein
84
glycosuria
1133
gnosis
634
goblet cell
134
goiter
684
Golgi apparatus
93
gomphosis
318
gonadal artery
853
gonadal vein
872
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH)
1195
gonadotropins
679
gonads
1188
gracilis
435
graded muscle response
376
graded potential
466
graft-versus-host disease
937
1286
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
Granular leukocytes
729
granulosa cells
1201
granzyme
908
graphesthesia
634
gray matter
453
gray rami communicantes
593
great cardiac vein
770
great cerebral vein
867
great saphenous vein
874
greater pelvis
288
greater sciatic foramen
288
greater sciatic notch
286
greater splanchnic nerve
593
greater trochanter
291
greater tubercle
278
greater wings of the sphenoid
bone
236
Gross anatomy
8
ground substance
140
Growth
16
growth hormone (GH)
677
gustation
542
gustatory receptor cells
542
gyrus
500
H
Hair
172
hair bulb
172
hair cells
548
hair follicle
172
hair matrix
172
hair papilla
172
hair root
172
hair shaft
172
Haldane effect
980
hallux
296
hamate
280
hamstring group
437
hand
278
hard palate
240
haustra
1029
haustral contraction
1031
head of the femur
290
head of the fibula
295
head of the humerus
278
head of the metatarsal bone
296
head of the radius
280
head of the rib
260
head of the ulna
280
heart block
783
heart bulge
799
heart rate (HR)
788
heart sounds
786
heavy chain
921
helicase
102
Helper T cells (Th)
919
hemangioblasts
879
hematocrit
712
hematopoiesis
194
hematopoietic stem cell
716
heme
722
hemiazygos vein
865
hemisection
646
hemocytoblast
716
Hemoglobin
721
hemolysis
739
hemolytic disease of the newborn
(HDN)
741
hemophilia
738
hemopoiesis
716
hemopoietic growth factors
716
hemorrhage
733
hemorrhagic stroke
628
hemosiderin
723
hemostasis
733
Henry’s law
971
heparin
738
hepatic artery
1033
hepatic artery proper
853
hepatic lobule
1034
hepatic portal system
877
hepatic portal vein
1033
hepatic sinusoid
1034
hepatic vein
872, 1034
hepatocyte
1034
hepatopancreatic ampulla
1023
hepatopancreatic sphincter
1023
heterozygous
1257
Hexokinase
1066
high endothelial venules
901
hilum
960
hindbrain
495
Hindmilk
1255
hinge joint
325
hip bone
285
hip joint
290
hippocampus
502
histamine
151, 911
histology
126
histone
100
hole
198
holocrine secretion
139
Homeostasis
8
homologous
107
homozygous
1257
hook of the hamate bone
280
horizontal plate
241
hormone
662
hormone receptor
668
human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG)
1230
humeroradial joint
336
humeroulnar joint
336
humerus
278
Hyaline cartilage
145
hydrochloric acid (HCl)
1018
hydrogen bond
50
hydrophilic
82
hydrophobic
82
Hydrostatic pressure
1160
hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA (HMG
CoA)
1079
hymen
1197
hyoglossus
409
hyoid bone
228
hypercalcemia
219, 1169
Hypercapnia
1174
Hyperchloremia
1168
Hyperextension
330
hyperflexia
648
hyperflexion
330
hyperglycemia
697
Hyperkalemia
1168
Hypernatremia
1167
hyperparathyroidism
687
Hyperphosphatemia
1169
hyperplasia
386
Hyperpnea
981
hypertension
840
hyperthyroidism
684
hypertonia
377
hypertonic
87
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
754
hypertrophy
378
hyperventilation
981
Hypervolemia
826
Index
1287
hypoblast
1233
Hypocalcemia
219, 1169
Hypocapnia
1174
Hypochloremia
1168
hypodermis
168
hypoglossal canal
246
hypoglossal nerve
522
Hypokalemia
1168
Hyponatremia
1167
hyponychium
175
hypoparathyroidism
687
Hypophosphatemia
1169
hypophyseal (pituitary) fossa
236
hypophyseal portal system
677
hypothalamus
505, 674
hypothenar
430
hypothenar eminence
430
hypothyroidism
684
hypotonia
377
hypotonic
87
hypotonicity
647
hypovolemia
628, 826
Hypovolemic shock
841
hypoxemia
722
hypoxia
822
I
IgA
923
IgD
922
IgE
923
IgG
923
IgM
922
ileocecal sphincter
1023
ileum
1023
iliac crest
286
iliac fossa
286
iliacus
432
iliococcygeus
419
iliocostalis cervicis
413
iliocostalis group
413
iliocostalis lumborum
413
iliocostalis thoracis
413
iliofemoral ligament
337
iliopsoas group
432
iliotibial tract
435
ilium
286
immediate hypersensitivity
931
immune system
894
immunoglobulin
921
immunoglobulins
714
immunological memory
912
implantation
1229
inactivation gate
474
inactive proenzymes
1082
incisors
1010
incomplete dominance
1263
incontinence
1115
incus
546
indirect pathway
503
Inferior
25
inferior angle of the scapula
276
inferior articular process
251
inferior cerebellar peduncle
(ICP)
649
inferior colliculus
507, 562
inferior extensor retinaculum
438
inferior gemellus
435
inferior mesenteric artery
853
inferior mesenteric ganglion
593
inferior nasal concha
231
inferior oblique
553
inferior olive
508, 650
inferior phrenic artery
853
inferior pubic ramus
287
inferior rectus
553
Inferior rotation
332
inferior vena cava
755, 872
Inflammation
151, 910
infraglenoid tubercle
276
infrahyoid muscles
410
infraorbital foramen
230
infraspinatus
425
infraspinous fossa
277
infratemporal fossa
231
infundibulum
674, 1205
ingestion
1003
inguinal canal
1192
inhibin
692
inhibitory postsynaptic potential
(IPSP)
477
initial segment
459
innate immune response
897
inner cell mass
1228
inner ear
546
inner segment
555
inner synaptic layer
554
innermost intercostal
419
inorganic compound
55
inositol triphosphate (IP3)
670
insertion
396
Inspiration
964
Inspiratory capacity (IC)
966
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)
965
insulin
695, 1087
insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)
678
integral protein
83
integration
455
integumentary system
163
interatrial band
774
interatrial septum
760
interaural intensity difference
561
interaural time difference
561
intercalated cell
1136
intercalated disc
382, 772
intercondylar eminence
294
intercondylar fossa
292
intercostal artery
851
intercostal muscles
418
intercostal nerves
526
intercostal vein
865
Interferons
909
Interleukins
718
intermediate
430
intermediate cuneiform
296
intermediate filament
98
Internal acoustic meatus
234
internal anal sphincter
1029
internal callus
214
internal capsule
574
internal carotid arteries
512
internal carotid artery
848
internal elastic membrane
813
internal iliac artery
853
internal iliac vein
874
internal intercostal
419
internal jugular vein
866
internal oblique
416
Internal respiration
973
internal root sheath
174
internal thoracic artery
848
internal thoracic vein
865
internal urinary sphincter
1114
internodal pathways
774
1288
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
internuclear ophthalmoplegia
640
interoceptor
541
interosseous border of the fibula
295
interosseous border of the radius
280
interosseous border of the tibia
294
interosseous border of the ulna
279
interosseous membrane
318
interosseous membrane of the
forearm
280
interosseous membrane of the
leg
294
interphalangeal joint
283
Interphase
108
interstitial fluid (IF)
1157
Interstitial fluid (IF)
83
interstitial fluid colloidal osmotic
pressure (IFCOP)
831
interstitial fluid hydrostatic
pressure (IFHP)
831
intertrochanteric crest
291
intertrochanteric line
291
intertubercular groove (sulcus)
278
interventricular foramina
515
interventricular septum
760
intervertebral disc
248, 256
intervertebral foramen
251
intestinal gland
1024
intestinal juice
1025
intestinal phase
1021
intorsion
639
Intra-alveolar pressure
963
intracapsular ligament
321
intracellular fluid (ICF)
1157
Intracellular fluid (ICF)
83
intramembranous ossification
206
intramural ganglia
595
Intrapleural pressure
963
intrinsic factor
1018
intrinsic ligament
321
intrinsic muscles of the hand
429
intrinsic muscles of the tongue
642
intrinsic pathway
737
intron
104
inulin
1128
Inversion
331
involution
1249
ion
47
ionic bond
48
ionotropic receptor
469
ipsilateral
559
iris
554
irregular bone
196
ischemia
822
ischemic stroke
628
ischial ramus
286
ischial spine
286
ischial tuberosity
286
ischiococcygeus
419
ischiofemoral ligament
337
ischiopubic ramus
287
ischium
286
isometric contraction
372
isotonic
87
isotonic contractions
372
isotope
43
isovolumic contraction
785
isovolumic ventricular relaxation
phase
785
isthmus
1205
J
jaundice
724
jaw-jerk reflex
638
jejunum
1023
joint
314
joint cavity
314
joint interzone
345
jugular (suprasternal) notch
259
jugular foramen
246
jugular veins
513
juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA)
1122
juxtaglomerular cell
1123
juxtamedullary nephrons
1120
K
karyotype
1256
keloid
185
Keratin
164
keratinocyte
164
keratohyalin
167
ketone bodies
1079
kinesthesia
501, 542
kinetic energy
51
kinetochore
110
knee joint
294
Korotkoff sounds
824
Krebs cycle
1069
kyphosis
250
L
labia
1005
labia majora
1197
labia minora
1197
labial frenulum
1006
lacrimal bone
242
lacrimal duct
552
lacrimal fossa
242
lacrimal gland
552
lactase
1040
Lactation
1252
lacteal
1024
lactic acid
370
lactiferous ducts
1210
lactiferous sinus
1210
lacuna
201
lacunae
145
lambdoid suture
239
lamina
251
lamina propria
130
Langerhans cell
166
lanugo
1242
large intestine
1027
laryngeal prominence
952
laryngopharynx
952, 1013
laryngotracheal bud
983
larynx
952
latch-bridges
385
latent period
375
Lateral
25
lateral (external) rotation
330
lateral apertures
516
lateral border of the scapula
276
lateral circumflex artery
859
lateral columns
510
lateral compartment of the leg
439
lateral condyle of the femur
291
lateral condyle of the tibia
294
lateral corticospinal tract
575
Index
1289
lateral cuneiform
296
lateral epicondyle of the femur
292
lateral epicondyle of the
humerus
278
Lateral excursion
331
Lateral flexion
329
lateral geniculate nucleus
564
lateral horn
509
lateral malleolus
295
lateral meniscus
340
lateral plantar artery
859
lateral pterygoid
408
lateral pterygoid plate
236
lateral rectus
553
lateral sacral crest
255
lateral sulcus
500
lateral supracondylar ridge
278
lateral tibiofemoral joint
339
lateral ventricles
515
lateralis
403
latissimus dorsi
423
leakage channel
470
leaky tight junctions
1134
left atrioventricular valve
765
left colic flexure
1028
left gastric artery
853
leg
290
lens
554
leptin
698
lesser pelvis
288
lesser sciatic foramen
288
lesser sciatic notch
286
lesser splanchnic nerve
593
lesser trochanter
291
lesser tubercle
278
lesser wings of the sphenoid
bone
236
let-down reflex
1253
Leukemia
732
leukocyte
727
Leukocyte esterase
1113
leukocytosis
732
Leukopenia
732
levator ani
419
levator palpebrae superioris
553
Leydig cells
1194
ligament
316
ligament of the head of the
femur
290, 338
ligamentum flavum
257
ligand
84
ligand-gated cation channel
597
ligand-gated channel
469
light chain
921
lightening
1246
limb bud
297
limbic cortex
500
limbic lobe
608
limbic system
500
linea alba
416
linea aspera
291
lingual frenulum
1007
lingual lipase
1007
lingual tonsil
952
Lingula
243
lipid
65
lipogenesis
1080
lipolysis
1077
lipoprotein lipase
1045
liver
1032
Localization of function
626
lochia
1249
long bone
195
long reflex
602
longissimus capitis
413
longissimus cervicis
413
longissimus group
413
longissimus thoracis
413
longitudinal fissure
500
longus
403
loop of Henle
1120
loose connective tissue
141
lordosis
250
lower esophageal sphincter
1014
lower motor neuron
467
lumbar arteries
853
lumbar curve
250
lumbar enlargement
576
lumbar plexus
525
lumbar puncture
514
lumbar veins
872
Lumbar vertebrae
255
lumbrical
430
lumen
810
lunate
280
lung
959
lung bud
983
lunula
175
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
679
Lymph
894
lymph node
894
Lymphatic capillaries
896
lymphatic system
894
lymphatic trunks
896
Lymphocytes
731, 897
lymphoid nodules
903
Lymphoid stem cells
717
Lymphoma
732
lysosome
94
lysozyme
730
M
macromolecule
62
macrophage
723, 907
Macrophage oxidative
metabolism
928
macula
550
macula densa
1122
Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)
30
main pancreatic duct
1023
major duodenal papilla
1023
major histocompatibility complex
(MHC)
914
malleus
546
maltase
1040
mammary glands
1210
mandible
230, 242
Mandibular foramen
242
Mandibular fossa
234
mandibular notch
242
manubrium
259
marginal arteries
769
mass movement
1031
mass number
42
masseter
407
mast cell
911
mastication
407, 1003
mastoid process
233
matrix
140
matter
40
maxillary bone
240
maxillary sinus
246
maxillary vein
866
maximus
403
Mean arterial pressure (MAP)
1290
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
822
meatuses
949
Mechanical digestion
1003
mechanically gated channel
469
mechanoreceptor
541
meconium
1242
Medial
25
medial (internal) rotation
330
medial border of the scapula
276
medial compartment of the thigh
435
medial condyle of the femur
292
medial condyle of the tibia
294
medial cuneiform
296
medial epicondyle of the femur
292
medial epicondyle of the
humerus
278
Medial excursion
331
medial forebrain bundle
608
medial geniculate nucleus
562
medial lemniscus
560
medial longitudinal fasciculus
(MLF)
639
medial malleolus
294
medial meniscus
340
medial plantar artery
859
medial pterygoid
408
medial pterygoid plate
236
medial rectus
553
medial tibiofemoral joint
339
medialis
403
median antebrachial vein
869
median aperture
516
median cubital vein
869
median nerve
525
median sacral artery
853
median sacral crest
255
mediastinal artery
851
medius
403
medulla
173, 1118
medullary cavity
197
megakaryocyte
732
Meissner corpuscle
177
Melanin
166
melanocyte
166
melanoma
181
melanosome
169
melatonin
691
membrane potential
471
memory cell
731
memory T cells
919
menarche
1207
meninges
513
meniscus
322
menses
1207
menses phase
1207
menstrual cycle
1207
Mental foramen
242
Mental protuberance
242
mental status exam
626
Merkel cell
166
Merocrine secretion
138
mesangial
1122
mesencephalic nuclei
561
mesencephalon
495
mesenchymal cell
142
mesenchyme
141
mesenteric plexus
595
mesoappendix
1027
mesoderm
127, 799, 1233
mesothelium
133, 756
messenger RNA (mRNA)
103
Metabolic acidosis
1177
Metabolic alkalosis
1178
metabolic rate
1093
Metabolism
14, 1058
metabotropic receptor
480
metacarpal bone
278
metacarpophalangeal joint
282
Metaphase
110
metaphase plate
110
metarteriole
816
metastasis
180
metatarsal bone
290
metatarsophalangeal joint
296
metencephalon
495
MHC class I
915
MHC class II
915
MHC polygeny
935
MHC polymorphism
935
micelle
1045
microcirculation
814
microfilament
97
Microglia
462
microscopic anatomy
8
microtubule
97
microvilli
1024
Micturition
1115
midbrain
495
midcarpal joint
281
middle cardiac vein
770
middle cerebellar peduncle
(MCP)
649
middle cerebral artery
849
middle cranial fossa
232
middle ear
546
middle nasal concha
231
middle sacral vein
874
middle scalene
414
migrating motility complex
1026
mineralocorticoids
689
Minerals
1097
minimus
403
mitochondrion
95
Mitosis
108
mitotic phase
109
mitotic spindle
110
mitral valve
765
mixing wave
1021
modeling
211
moderator band
763
molars
1010
molecule
47
monocyte
907
Monocytes
731
monoglyceride molecules
1076
monosaccharide
62, 1063
mons pubis
1197
morula
1228
motilin
1026
motility
999
motor end-plate
364
motor exam
626
motor unit
373
mucosa
998
Mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT)
904
mucosal barrier
1021
mucous connective tissue
141
mucous gland
140
mucous membrane
129
mucous neck cells
1018
Müllerian duct
1213
multiaxial joint
316
multifidus
413
multimodal integration area
567
Index
1291
multipennate
399
Multipolar
460
multipotent
113
murmur
787
muscarinic receptor
479, 597
muscle tension
372
Muscle tissue
126
muscle tone
377
muscular artery
814
muscularis
998
mutation
96, 1264
mydriasis
612
myelencephalon
495
myelin
150, 453
myelin sheath
463
Myeloid stem cells
717
myenteric plexus
999
mylohyoid
410
Mylohyoid line
242
myoblast
386
myocardial conducting cells
772
myocardial contractile cells
772
myocardium
758
myocyte
148
myofibril
364
myogenic mechanism
1138
myogenic response
838
myogram
375
myometrium
1206
myosin
361
myotube
386
N
NADH
1063
nail bed
175
nail body
175
nail cuticle
175
nail fold
175
nail root
175
naïve lymphocyte
901
naris
948
nasal bone
242, 949
nasal cavity
231
nasal conchae
244
nasal septum
231, 244, 949
nasolacrimal canal
242
nasopharynx
952
Natural killer (NK) cells
731
natural killer cell (NK)
899
navicular
296
neck of the femur
291
neck of the radius
280
neck of the rib
260
Necrosis
151
Negative feedback
20
negative inotropic factors
797
negative selection
917
Neonatal hypothyroidism
684
Nephrons
1119
nerve
454
nerve plexus
525
nervi vasorum
813
Nervous tissue
126
net filtration pressure (NFP)
831,
1127
neural crest
494
neural fold
494, 1236
neural groove
494
neural plate
494, 1236
neural tube
494, 1236
neural tunic
554
neuraxis
496
Neurogenic shock
842
neuroglia
149
neurological exam
626
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
362
neuron
149, 453
neuropeptide
480
neurotransmitter
364, 466
neurulation
1236
Neutralization
927
neutron
41
neutrophil
907
neutrophils
730
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD)
1063
nicotinic receptor
479, 597
nociceptor
541
node of Ranvier
459
nonshivering thermogenesis
1251
nonspecific channel
469
norepinephrine
597, 690
normal range
20
notochord
260, 1236
nuchal ligament
257
nuclear envelope
99
nuclear pore
99
nucleolus
100
nucleosidase
1042
nucleosome
100
nucleotide
72
nucleus
91, 453
nucleus ambiguus
595
nucleus cuneatus
559
nucleus gracilis
559
nucleus pulposus
256
nutrient
17
nutrient foramen
205
O
oblique
403
Obstructive shock
842
obturator externus
435
obturator foramen
287
obturator internus
435
occipital bone
236
occipital condyle
236
occipital lobe
500
occipital sinus
867
occipital sinuses
513
occipitalis
404
occipitofrontalis
404
oculomotor nerve
522
odorant molecules
544
olecranon fossa
279
olecranon process
279
olfaction
505, 544
olfactory bulb
544
olfactory epithelium
544
olfactory nerve
522
olfactory pit
983
olfactory sensory neuron
544
Oligodendrocyte
150, 462
oligopotent
113
oliguria
1112
omohyoid
411
oocyte
1196
oogenesis
1199
oogonia
1199
Open reduction
212
ophthalmic artery
849
opponens digiti minimi
430
opponens pollicis
430
Opposition
332
opsins
555
Opsonization
909
optic canal
243, 245
1292
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
optic chiasm
563
optic disc
554
optic nerve
522, 554
optic tract
564
oral cavity
1005
oral vestibule
1006
orbicularis oculi
404
orbicularis oris
404
orbit
230
organ
11
organ system
11
organelle
91
organelles
11
organic compound
55
organism
13
organogenesis
1238
organs of Corti
547
origin
396
oropharynx
952, 1013
orthopedist
193
orthostatic reflex
512
Osmoreceptors
541, 676
Osmosis
86
osseous tissue
191
ossicles
546
ossification
206
ossification center
206
osteoblast
201
osteoclast
201
osteocyte
201
osteogenic cell
201
osteoid
206
osteomalacia
1144
osteon
203
Osteoporosis
217
otolithic membrane
550
outer segment
555
outer synaptic layer
554
oval window
546
ovarian artery
853
ovarian cycle
1199
ovarian vein
872
ovaries
1198
ovulation
1199
ovum
1200
oxidation
1062
oxidation-reduction reaction
1062
oxidative phosphorylation
1070
oxygen debt
371
oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation
curve
976
oxyhemoglobin
722, 976
oxytocin
676
P
P wave
779
pacemaker
774
pacesetter cell
385
Pacinian corpuscle
177
packed cell volume (PCV)
713
palatine bone
241
palatine process
240
palatine tonsil
952
palatoglossal arch
1007
palatoglossus
409
palatopharyngeal arch
1007
palmar arches
857
palmar interossei
430
palmar venous arches
869
palmaris longus
428
palpebral conjunctiva
552
pancreas
693, 1035
pancreatic amylase
1040
pancreatic islets
693
pancreatic juice
1035
pancreatic lipase
1042
pancreatic lipases
1076
pancreatic nuclease
1042
papillae
542
papillary layer
168
papillary muscle
763
paracrine
664
Parallel
398
paramedian pontine reticular
formation (PPRF)
639
paranasal sinus
950
paranasal sinuses
246
parasympathetic division
590
parasympathomimetic drugs
613
parathyroid glands
685
parathyroid hormone (PTH)
685
paravertebral ganglia
520, 593
parenchyma
142
paresis
648
parietal bone
233
parietal branches
851
parietal cells
1018
parietal lobe
500
parietal pleura
960
parieto-occipital sulcus
501
parotid glands
1008
Partial pressure
970
parturition
1247
Passive immunity
925
Passive transport
84
patella
290
patellar ligament
340, 436
patellar surface
292
pattern recognition receptor
(PRR)
908
pectinate line
1030
pectinate muscles
763
pectineal line
287
pectineus
435
pectoral girdle
275, 421
pectoralis major
423
pectoralis minor
421
pedicels
1121
pedicle
251
pelvic brim
288
pelvic diaphragm
419
pelvic girdle
285, 432
pelvic inlet
288
pelvic outlet
288
pelvis
285
penis
1193
Pennate
399
pepsin
1082
pepsinogen
1018
peptide bond
69
perforating canal
203
perforin
908
perfusion
814
pericardial artery
851
pericardial cavity
752
pericardial sac
756
pericardium
28, 756
perichondrium
207
pericyte
387
perimetrium
1206
perimysium
360
perineum
420
perineurium
520
periodic table of the elements
42
periodontal ligament
318
periosteum
197
Index
1293
peripheral chemoreceptor
969
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
452
Peripheral proteins
84
peripheral tolerance
921
Peristalsis
1003
peritoneum
28
peritubular capillaries
1119
permanent teeth
1010
peroxisome
95
perpendicular plate of the
ethmoid bone
231
petrosal sinus
867
petrous ridge
233
pH
59
Phagocytosis
89, 907
phalanx bone of the foot
290
phalanx bone of the hand
278
pharyngeal tonsil
952
pharynx
951, 1013
phenotype
1256
philtrum
948
phosphatase
1042
phosphodiesterase (PDE)
670
phospholipid
67
Phosphorylation
74
phosphorylation cascade
669
photoisomerization
557
photon
556
photoreceptor
541
phrenic nerve
525
phrenic vein
872
physiological sphincter
1116
physiology
8
pia mater
513
pineal gland
691
pinealocyte
691
pinocytosis
89
piriformis
435
pisiform
280
pituitary dwarfism
678
pituitary gland
674
pivot joint
324
placenta
1228
placenta previa
1231
placentation
1235
plane
25
plane joint
325
plantar aponeurosis
439
plantar arch
859
plantar flexion
331
plantar group
439
plantar reflex
647
plantar veins
874
plantar venous arch
874
plantaris
439
plasma
712
plasma cell
899
Plasma osmolality
1163
plasmin
737
platelet plug
734
platelets
712
pleura
28
pleural cavity
960
Pleural fluid
961
plexus
520
pluripotent
113
pluripotent stem cell
716
pneumotaxic center
968
podocytes
1121
polar body
1199
polar molecule
49
pollex
283
polyclonal response
918
polycythemia
727
polymorphonuclear
730
polypeptide
105
polyribosome
107
Polysaccharides
62, 1063
polyspermy
1225
polyuria
1112
popliteal artery
859
popliteal fossa
437
popliteal vein
874
popliteus
439
porta hepatis
1033
portal triad
1034
positive chemotaxis
728
Positive feedback
22
positive inotropic factors
797
positive selection
916
Positron emission tomography
(PET)
31
postabsorptive state
1088
postcentral gyrus
501
Posterior
24
posterior (dorsal) sacral foramen
255
posterior arch
253
posterior cardiac vein
770
posterior cerebral artery
849
posterior columns
510
posterior communicating artery
849
posterior compartment of the leg
439
posterior compartment of the
thigh
437
posterior cranial fossa
232
posterior cruciate ligament
340
posterior horn
509
posterior inferior iliac spine
286
posterior interventricular artery
769
posterior interventricular sulcus
757
posterior longitudinal ligament
257
posterior median sulcus
509
posterior sacroiliac ligament
287
posterior scalene
414
posterior superior iliac spine
286
posterior talofibular ligament
343
posterior tibial artery
859
posterior tibial vein
874
posterolateral sulcus
509
postganglionic fiber
594
postsynaptic potential (PSP)
477
Potential energy
51
power stroke
368
PP cell
694
praxis
633
precapillary sphincters
816
precentral gyrus
501
precentral gyrus of the frontal
cortex
467
prefrontal lobe
501
preganglionic fiber
594
preload
785
premolars
1010
premotor area
501
premotor cortex
573
prepotential depolarization
776
prepuce
1194
Pressure
19
prevertebral ganglia
520, 593
1294
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
primary adaptive response
912
primary curve
250
primary follicles
1201
primary lymphoid organs
899
primary ossification center
209
primary sensory cortex
567
primary union
152
primary vesicles
495
prime mover
396
primitive atrium
800
primitive heart tube
800
primitive streak
1233
primitive ventricle
800
primordial follicles
1201
principal cell
1136
procedural memory
632
process
453
product
52
progesterone
692
projection
198
prolactin
1253
prolactin (PRL)
679
proliferative phase
1209
proliferative zone
210
promoter
104
pronated position
330
Pronation
331
pronator drift
647
pronator quadratus
426
pronator teres
426
Prone
24
propagation
466
Prophase
110
proprioception
501, 542
proprioceptor
541
propulsion
1003
prosencephalon
495
prostaglandin
68
prostate gland
1192
protein
68
protein kinase
669
proteolysis
1082
proteome
103
proton
41
Protraction
331
Proximal
25
proximal convoluted tubules
(PCTs)
1120
proximal radioulnar joint
279,
325
proximal tibiofibular joint
295
Pseudostratified columnar
epithelium
134
psoas major
432
psychoneuroimmunology
938
pterion
239
Puberty
1213
pubic arch
287
pubic body
287
pubic symphysis
286
pubic tubercle
287
pubis
286
pubococcygeus
419
pubofemoral ligament
337
pulmonary arteries
755
pulmonary artery
844, 960
pulmonary capillaries
755
pulmonary circuit
754, 844
pulmonary plexus
960
pulmonary surfactant
957
pulmonary trunk
755, 844
pulmonary valve
765
pulmonary veins
755, 844
Pulmonary ventilation
961
pulp cavity
1011
pulse
823
pulse pressure
822
Punnett square
1260
pupil
554
purine
72
Purkinje fibers
776
putamen
502
pyloric antrum
1017
pyloric canal
1017
pyloric sphincter
1017
pylorus
1017
pyramidal decussation
574
pyramidine
72
pyramids
574
pyruvate
1064
pyruvic acid
370
Q
QRS complex
779
quadratus femoris
435
quadratus lumborum
416
quadriceps femoris group
436
quadriceps tendon
436
quickening
1242
Quiet breathing
965
R
radial artery
857
radial collateral ligament
336
radial fossa
279
radial nerve
525
radial notch of the ulna
279
radial tuberosity
280
radial vein
869
Radiation
1093
radioactive isotope
44
radiocarpal joint
280
radius
278
ramus of the mandible
242
reabsorption
831
reactant
52
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
96
receptive aphasia
633
receptor
84
receptor cell
541
receptor potential
476
Receptor-mediated endocytosis
89
recessive
1258
recessive lethal
1264
recruitment
374
rectal valves
1028
rectum
1028
rectus
403
rectus abdominis
416
rectus femoris
436
rectus sheaths
416
red blood cells (RBCs)
712
Red marrow
194
red nucleus
576, 650
reduction
1062
referred pain
601
reflex arc
599
refractory period
474
Regional anatomy
8
Regulatory T cells (Treg)
920
relative refractory period
474
relaxation phase
375
remodeling
211
renal artery
853
renal columns
1118
renal corpuscle
1119
renal cortex
1118
Index
1295
renal fat pad
1118
renal hilum
1119
renal papillae
1118
renal pyramids
1118
renal vein
872
renin
1121
repolarization
472
reposition
332
Reproduction
16
reserve zone
209
Residual volume (RV)
965
resistance
475, 821
Respiratory acidosis
1178
Respiratory alkalosis
1178
respiratory bronchiole
955
respiratory cycle
964
respiratory epithelium
950
respiratory membrane
957
respiratory pump
830
respiratory rate
967
Respiratory volume
965
respiratory zone
948
response
455
Responsiveness
15
rest and digest
590
resting membrane potential
472
Reticular fiber
142
reticular formation
507
reticular lamina
130
reticular layer
168
Reticular tissue
143
reticulocyte
721
reticuloendothelial cells
1034
reticulospinal tract
576
retina
554
retinacula
429
retinal
556
retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
554
retraction
331
retrograde amnesia
632
retroperitoneal
1000, 1115
Rh blood group
740
rhodopsin
555
rhombencephalon
495
rhomboid major
421
rhomboid minor
421
ribonuclease
1042
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
72
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
105
ribosome
93
ribs
228
rickets
180
right atrioventricular valve
764
right colic flexure
1028
right gastric artery
853
right lymphatic duct
897
Rinne test
638
RNA polymerase
104
rod photoreceptor
555
Romberg test
646
root
948, 1011
Rotation
330
rotator cuff
335, 425
round window
546
rubrospinal tract
576, 650
ruga
1017
rugae
1198
S
S phase
108
saccade
639
saccharolytic fermentation
1031
saccule
550
sacral canal
255
sacral foramina
255
sacral hiatus
255
sacral micturition center
1116
sacral plexus
525
sacral promontory
255
sacrococcygeal curve
250
sacroiliac joint
286
sacrospinous ligament
287
sacrotuberous ligament
287
sacrum
228
saddle joint
325
sagittal plane
25
sagittal suture
239
Saliva
1008
salivary amylase
1008, 1063
salivary glands
1008
salivation
1009
saltatory conduction
475
saphenous nerve
525
sarcolemma
361
sarcomere
361
sarcopenia
378
sarcoplasm
361
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
361
sartorius
436
satellite cell
386, 463
scala tympani
546
scala vestibuli
546
scalene muscles
414
scaphoid
280
scapula
275
scar
185
Schwann cell
150, 463
sciatic nerve
525
sciatica
525
sclera
554
sclerotome
260
scoliosis
250
scrotum
1187
sebaceous gland
176
sebum
176
second messenger
669
second-degree burn
184
secondary adaptive response
912
secondary curve
250
secondary follicles
1201
secondary lymphoid organs
901
secondary ossification center
209
secondary sex characteristics
1213
secondary union
152
secondary vesicles
495
secretin
1082
secretory phase
1209
section
25
segmental muscle group
414
Segmentation
1003
selective permeability
84
sella turcica
236
semen
1192
semicircular canals
550
semilunar valves
760
semimembranosus
437
seminal vesicle
1192
seminiferous tubules
1189
semispinalis capitis
413
semispinalis cervicis
413
semispinalis thoracis
413
semitendinosus
437
sensation
455
sensitization
932
sensor
20
1296
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
sensorineural hearing
638
sensory exam
626
sensory homunculus
565
sensory modality
542
sepsis
842
septal cartilage
244
septic shock
842
septum
760
septum primum
760
Seroconversion
926
serosa
999
serous gland
140
serous membrane
27, 130
serratus anterior
421
Sertoli cells
1189
serum
737
sesamoid bone
196
set point
20
severe combined
immunodeficiency disease
(SCID)
930
sex chromosomes
1256
shaft of the femur
291
shaft of the fibula
295
shaft of the humerus
278
shaft of the radius
280
shaft of the tibia
294
shaft of the ulna
279
short bone
195
short reflex
602
short-term memory
632
shunt
1240
sickle cell disease
726
sigmoid colon
1028
sigmoid sinuses
513, 867
simple columnar epithelium
134
simple cuboidal epithelium
133
simple squamous epithelium
133
sinoatrial (SA) node
774
sinus rhythm
774
sinus venosus
800
sinusoid capillary
815
sister chromatid
108
size exclusion
469
Skeletal muscle
148, 358
skeletal muscle pump
829
skeletal system
191
skeleton
228
skull
228
Slow oxidative (SO)
377
small cardiac vein
770
small intestine
1022
small saphenous vein
874
Smooth muscle
148, 359
Snellen chart
636
sodium bicarbonate
1082
sodium-potassium pump
88
soft palate
1006
soleal line
294
soleus
439
solitary nucleus
561
solution
55
soma
453
somatic cell
107
somatic nervous system (SNS)
456
somatic reflex
599
somatosensation
501, 542
somite
260
somites
386, 1236
spasticity
648
Spatial summation
477
special sense
542
specific gravity
1113
sperm
1186
spermatic cord
1191
spermatid
1190
spermatocyte
1190
spermatogenesis
1189
spermatogonia
1189
spermiogenesis
1190
sphenoid bone
236
sphenoid sinus
246
sphincter urethrovaginalis
420
sphygmomanometer
824
spinal accessory nerve
522
spinal cavity
27
spinal cord
452
spinal nerve
519
spinal trigeminal nucleus
561
spinalis capitis
413
spinalis cervicis
413
spinalis group
413
spinalis thoracis
413
spine of the scapula
277
spinocerebellar tract
646
spinocerebellum
650
spinothalamic tract
559
spinous process
251
spiral ganglia
546
spleen
902
splenic artery
853
splenius
412
splenius capitis
412
splenius cervicis
412
spliceosome
104
splicing
104
spongy bone
203
spontaneous depolarization
776
Squamous cell carcinoma
181
squamous suture
239
stage of exhaustion
689
stage of resistance
689
stapes
546
stem cell
112
stereocilia
548
stereognosis
634
sternal angle
259
sternal end of the clavicle
276
sternoclavicular joint
276
sternocleidomastoid
411
sternohyoid
411
sternothyroid
411
sternum
228
steroid
67
stimulus
455
stomach
1016
straight sinus
513, 867
stratified columnar epithelium
135
Stratified cuboidal epithelium
135
Stratified squamous epithelium
135
stratum basale
165
stratum corneum
167
stratum granulosum
167
stratum lucidum
167
stratum spinosum
166
stress-relaxation response
386
stretch mark
185
stretch reflex
578
striation
148
striatum
502
stroke
628
stroke volume (SV)
788
Index
1297
styloglossus
409
stylohyoid
410
Styloid process
234
styloid process of the radius
280
styloid process of the ulna
280
Stylomastoid foramen
234
subacromial bursa
335
subarachnoid space
514
subclavian artery
848
subclavian vein
864
subclavius
421
subcortical nuclei
502
subcutaneous bursa
322
sublingual glands
1008
submandibular glands
1008
submodalities
542
submucosa
998
submucosal plexus
999
submuscular bursa
322
subpubic angle
287
subscapular bursa
335
subscapular fossa
277
subscapular vein
869
subscapularis
425
substantia nigra pars compacta
504
substantia nigra pars reticulata
503
substrate
71
subtalar joint
343
subtendinous bursa
322
subthalamus
505
Sucrase
1040
sudoriferous glands
175
sulcus
500, 757
summate
477
Superficial
25
superficial anterior compartment
of the forearm
428
superficial posterior compartment
of the forearm
428
superficial reflex
647
Superior
24
superior angle of the scapula
276
superior articular process
251
superior articular process of the
sacrum
255
superior border of the scapula
276
superior cerebellar peduncle
(SCP)
649
superior cervical ganglion
593
superior colliculus
507, 562
superior extensor retinaculum
438
superior gemellus
435
superior mesenteric artery
853
superior mesenteric ganglion
593
superior nasal concha
231
superior nuchal line
236
superior oblique
553
Superior orbital fissure
245
superior phrenic artery
851
superior pubic ramus
287
superior rectus
553
superior rotation
331
superior sagittal sinus
513, 867
superior vena cava
755, 864
supinated position
330
Supination
331
supinator
426
supine
24
supplemental motor area
573
Supportive connective tissue
141
suprachiasmatic nucleus
564
supraglenoid tubercle
276
Suprahyoid muscles
410
supraorbital foramen
230
supraorbital margin
230
suprascapular notch
276
supraspinatus
425
supraspinous fossa
277
supraspinous ligament
257
surgical neck
278
suspension
56
suspensory ligaments
1211
sustentaculum tali
295
suture
239, 317
sympathetic chain ganglia
520,
591
sympathetic division
590
sympatholytic drug
611
sympathomimetic drug
611
symphysis
320
synapses
459
synaptic cleft
364, 478
synaptic end bulb
459
synarthrosis
314
synchondrosis
319
syncytiotrophoblast
1230
syndesmosis
318
synergist
396
synostosis
317
synovial fluid
321
synovial joint
314
synovial membrane
129, 321
synthesis reaction
52
systemic anatomy
8
systemic circuit
754
systemic edema
1127
systemic nerve
525
systole
784
systolic pressure
821
T
T cell
898
T cell tolerance
916
T cell-dependent antigen
926
T cell-independent antigen
926
T lymphocytes
731
T wave
779
T-tubules
364
talocrural joint
342
talus
295
target effector
592
target heart rate
790
tarsal bone
290
taste buds
542
tectorial membrane
548
tectospinal tract
576
tectum
507
tegmentum
507
telencephalon
495
telogen
174
Telophase
110
temporal bone
233
temporal fossa
231
temporal lobe
500
temporal process of the zygomatic
bone
231
Temporal summation
477
temporal vein
866
temporalis
407
temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
333
1298
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
tendinous intersections
416
tendon
321
tendon sheath
322
teniae coli
1029
tensor fascia latae
434
teres major
425
teres minor
425
terminal electron acceptor
1067
terminal ganglia
520, 595
tertiary follicles
1201
testes
1188
testicular artery
853
testicular vein
872
testosterone
692
tetanus
376
Th1 cells
920
Th2 cells
920
thalamus
466, 505
Thalassemia
727
theca cells
1201
thenar
430
thenar eminence
430
thermoneutral
1091
thermoreceptor
466, 541
thermoregulation
1091
thick filament
361
thigh
290
thin filament
361
third ventricle
515
third-degree burn
184
thoracic aorta
846
thoracic cage
228
thoracic cavity
27
thoracic curve
250
thoracic duct
897
thoracic vertebrae
254
Thoracic wall compliance
964
thoracolumbar system
591
thoroughfare channel
816
threshold
466
thrombin
737
thrombocytes
732
thrombocytopenia
732
Thrombocytosis
732
Thrombopoietin
718
thrombosis
738
thrombus
738
thymocyte
899
thymosins
699
thymus
699, 900
thyrocervical artery
848
thyrohyoid
411
thyroid cartilage
952
thyroid gland
680
thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)
678
thyroxine
682
tibia
290
tibial collateral ligament
340
tibial nerve
525
tibial tuberosity
294
tibialis anterior
438
tibialis posterior
439
Tidal volume (TV)
965
tight junction
132
tissue
11, 126
tissue factor
737
tissue membrane
128
Tissue typing
934
tongue
1007
Tonsils
903
topographical
558
Total dead space
967
total lung capacity (TLC)
966
Total pressure
970
totipotent
113, 127
totipotent stem cell
716
trabeculae
203
trabeculae carneae
763
trachea
954
trachealis muscle
954
tract
454
trait
1258
transamination
1083
transcription
104
transcription factor
114
transduction
540
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
105
transferrin
723
transient ischemic attack (TIA)
628, 848
transitional epithelium
135
Translation
105
Transpulmonary pressure
963
transverse colon
1028
transverse foramen
252
transverse plane
25
transverse process
251
transverse sinuses
513, 867
transversospinales
413
transversus abdominis
416
trapezium
280
trapezius
421
trapezoid
280
treppe
376
tri
403
triad
364
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA)
1065
triceps brachii
426
tricuspid valve
764
trigeminal ganglion
519
trigeminal nerve
522
triglyceride
65
triglycerides
1076
trigone
1114
triiodothyronine
682
trimesters
1243
triplet
103
triquetrum
280
trochlea
279, 553
trochlear nerve
522
trochlear notch
279
trophoblasts
1228
tropomyosin
361
troponin
361
true labor
1247
true ribs
260
true vocal cord
953
truncus arteriosus
800
trunk
844
trypsin
1082
trypsinogen
1082
tubercle of the rib
260
tubuloglomerular feedback
1138
tunica externa
813
tunica intima
812
tunica media
813
twitch
375
tympanic membrane
546
type I alveolar cell
957
type I hypersensitivity
931
type II alveolar cell
957
Type II hypersensitivity
932
Type III hypersensitivity
932
U
ulna
278
Index
1299
ulnar artery
857
ulnar collateral ligament
336
ulnar nerve
525
ulnar notch of the radius
280
ulnar tuberosity
279
ulnar vein
869
Ultrasonography
31
Umami
542
umbilical arteries
879
umbilical cord
1235
umbilical vein
879
uniaxial joint
316
unipennate
399
Unipolar
460
unipotent
113
universal donor
742
universal recipient
742
upper esophageal sphincter
1014
upper motor neuron
467
upregulation
671
urea cycle
1083
urethra
1114
Urinalysis
1111
urochrome
1111
urogenital triangle
420
uterine tubes
1205
uterus
1206
utricle
550
V
vagina
1198
vagus nerve
522
valence shell
46
Valsalva’s maneuver
1031
valve
760
variable region domain
913
varicosity
385, 598
vasa recta
1119
vasa vasorum
811
Vascular shock
842
vascular shunt
816
vascular spasm
734
vascular tone
826
Vascular tubes
879
vascular tunic
554
vasoconstriction
813
vasodilation
151, 813
vasomotion
816
vasomotor nerves
609
vastus intermedius
436
vastus lateralis
436
vastus medialis
436
vein
817
venous reserve
820
Ventilation
972
ventral
24
ventral (anterior) cavity
26
ventral (anterior) nerve root
509
ventral posterior nucleus
561
ventral respiratory group (VRG)
968
ventral stream
569
ventricle
462, 754
ventricles
515
ventricular ejection phase
785
venule
816
vermis
650
vernix caseosa
1242
vertebra
228
vertebral (spinal) canal
251
vertebral arch
251
vertebral arteries
512
vertebral artery
848
vertebral column
228
vertebral foramen
251
vertebral vein
865
vesicle
88
vestibular fold
953
vestibular ganglion
550
vestibular nuclei
562
vestibule
546
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR)
563, 640
vestibulocerebellum
650
vestibulocochlear nerve
522
vestibulospinal tract
576
villi
1024
visceral branches
851
visceral muscle
386
visceral pleura
960
visceral reflex
599
visceral sense
542
Vision
552
visual acuity
554
Vital capacity (VC)
966
vitamin D
180
Vitamins
1095
vitiligo
171
vitreous humor
554
voltage-gated channel
470
voltage-gated sodium channels
364
voluntary phase
1015
vomer bone
231
vulva
1197
W
wave summation
376
Weber test
638
Wernicke’s area
633
white blood cells (WBCs)
712
white matter
453
white rami communicantes
593
Wolffian duct
1213
working memory
571
wound contraction
152
X
X-linked
1261
X-linked dominant
1261
X-linked recessive
1262
X-ray
28
xiphoid process
259
Y
Yellow marrow
194
yolk sac
1233
Z
zona fasciculata
688
zona glomerulosa
688
zona pellucida
1224
zona reticularis
688
zone of calcified matrix
210
zone of maturation and
hypertrophy
210
zonule fibers
554
zygapophysial joints
333
zygomatic arch
231
zygomatic bone
242
zygomatic process of the temporal
bone
231
zygote
1224
1300
Index
Access for free at openstax.org
Index
1301
