9.7 Development of Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the two processes by which mesenchyme can give rise to bone
•
Discuss the process by which joints of the limbs are formed
Joints form during embryonic development in conjunction with the formation and growth of the associated bones.
The embryonic tissue that gives rise to all bones, cartilages, and connective tissues of the body is called
mesenchyme. In the head, mesenchyme will accumulate at those areas that will become the bones that form the
top and sides of the skull. The mesenchyme in these areas will develop directly into bone through the process of
intramembranous ossification, in which mesenchymal cells differentiate into bone-producing cells that then
generate bone tissue. The mesenchyme between the areas of bone production will become the fibrous connective
tissue that fills the spaces between the developing bones. Initially, the connective tissue-filled gaps between the
bones are wide, and are called fontanelles. After birth, as the skull bones grow and enlarge, the gaps between them
decrease in width and the fontanelles are reduced to suture joints in which the bones are united by a narrow layer of
fibrous connective tissue.
The bones that form the base and facial regions of the skull develop through the process of endochondral
ossification. In this process, mesenchyme accumulates and differentiates into hyaline cartilage, which forms a
model of the future bone. The hyaline cartilage model is then gradually, over a period of many years, displaced by
bone. The mesenchyme between these developing bones becomes the fibrous connective tissue of the suture joints
between the bones in these regions of the skull.
A similar process of endochondral ossification gives rises to the bones and joints of the limbs. The limbs initially
develop as small limb buds that appear on the sides of the embryo around the end of the fourth week of
development. Starting during the sixth week, as each limb bud continues to grow and elongate, areas of
mesenchyme within the bud begin to differentiate into the hyaline cartilage that will form models for of each of the
future bones. The synovial joints will form between the adjacent cartilage models, in an area called the joint
interzone. Cells at the center of this interzone region undergo cell death to form the joint cavity, while surrounding
mesenchyme cells will form the articular capsule and supporting ligaments. The process of endochondral
ossification, which converts the cartilage models into bone, begins by the twelfth week of embryonic development.
At birth, ossification of much of the bone has occurred, but the hyaline cartilage of the epiphyseal plate will remain
throughout childhood and adolescence to allow for bone lengthening. Hyaline cartilage is also retained as the
articular cartilage that covers the surfaces of the bones at synovial joints.

Disorders of the...
Joints
The ankle is the most frequently injured joint in the body, with the most common injury being an inversion ankle
sprain. A sprain is the stretching or tearing of the supporting ligaments. Excess inversion causes the talus bone
to tilt laterally, thus damaging the ligaments on the lateral side of the ankle. The anterior talofibular ligament is
most commonly injured, followed by the calcaneofibular ligament. In severe inversion injuries, the forceful
lateral movement of the talus not only ruptures the lateral ankle ligaments, but also fractures the distal fibula.
Less common are eversion sprains of the ankle, which involve stretching of the deltoid ligament on the medial
side of the ankle. Forcible eversion of the foot, for example, with an awkward landing from a jump or when a
football player has a foot planted and is hit on the lateral ankle, can result in a Pott’s fracture and dislocation of
the ankle joint. In this injury, the very strong deltoid ligament does not tear, but instead shears off the medial
malleolus of the tibia. This frees the talus, which moves laterally and fractures the distal fibula. In extreme
cases, the posterior margin of the tibia may also be sheared off.
Above the ankle, the distal ends of the tibia and fibula are united by a strong syndesmosis formed by the
interosseous membrane and ligaments at the distal tibiofibular joint. These connections prevent separation
between the distal ends of the tibia and fibula and maintain the talus locked into position between the medial
malleolus and lateral malleolus. Injuries that produce a lateral twisting of the leg on top of the planted foot can
result in stretching or tearing of the tibiofibular ligaments, producing a syndesmotic ankle sprain or “high ankle
sprain.”
Most ankle sprains can be treated using the RICE technique: Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation. Reducing
joint mobility using a brace or cast may be required for a period of time. More severe injuries involving ligament
tears or bone fractures may require surgery.
