17.11 Development and Aging of the Endocrine System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the embryonic origins of the endocrine system
•
Discuss the effects of aging on the endocrine system
The endocrine system arises from all three embryonic germ layers. The endocrine glands that produce the steroid
hormones, such as the gonads and adrenal cortex, arise from the mesoderm. In contrast, endocrine glands that
arise from the endoderm and ectoderm produce the amine, peptide, and protein hormones. The pituitary gland
arises from two distinct areas of the ectoderm: the anterior pituitary gland arises from the oral ectoderm, whereas
the posterior pituitary gland arises from the neural ectoderm at the base of the hypothalamus. The pineal gland also
arises from the ectoderm. The two structures of the adrenal glands arise from two different germ layers: the adrenal
cortex from the mesoderm and the adrenal medulla from ectoderm neural cells. The endoderm gives rise to the
thyroid and parathyroid glands, as well as the pancreas and the thymus.
As the body ages, changes occur that affect the endocrine system, sometimes altering the production, secretion,
and catabolism of hormones. For example, the structure of the anterior pituitary gland changes as vascularization
decreases and the connective tissue content increases with increasing age. This restructuring affects the gland’s
hormone production. For example, the amount of human growth hormone that is produced declines with age,
resulting in the reduced muscle mass commonly observed in the elderly.
The adrenal glands also undergo changes as the body ages; as fibrous tissue increases, the production of cortisol
and aldosterone decreases. Interestingly, the production and secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine remain
normal throughout the aging process.
A well-known example of the aging process affecting an endocrine gland is menopause and the decline of ovarian
function. With increasing age, the ovaries decrease in both size and weight and become progressively less sensitive
to gonadotropins. This gradually causes a decrease in estrogen and progesterone levels, leading to menopause and
the inability to reproduce. Low levels of estrogens and progesterone are also associated with some disease states,
such as osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, and hyperlipidemia, or abnormal blood lipid levels.
Testosterone levels also decline with age, a condition called andropause (or viropause); however, this decline is
much less dramatic than the decline of estrogens, and much more gradual, rarely affecting sperm production until
very old age. Although this means that males maintain their ability to produce offspring for decades longer than
females, the quantity, quality, and motility of their sperm is often reduced.
As the body ages, the thyroid gland produces less of the thyroid hormones, causing a gradual decrease in the basal
metabolic rate. The lower metabolic rate reduces the production of body heat and increases levels of body fat.
Parathyroid hormones, on the other hand, increase with age. This may be because of reduced dietary calcium levels,
causing a compensatory increase in parathyroid hormone. However, increased parathyroid hormone levels
combined with decreased levels of calcitonin (and estrogens in females) can lead to osteoporosis as PTH stimulates
demineralization of bones to increase blood calcium levels. Notice that osteoporosis is common in all elderly people
regardless of sex.

Increasing age also affects glucose metabolism, as blood glucose levels spike more rapidly and take longer to return
to normal in the elderly. In addition, increasing glucose intolerance may occur because of a gradual decline in
cellular insulin sensitivity. Almost 27 percent of Americans aged 65 and older have diabetes.
