17.10 Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the organs with a secondary endocrine function, the hormone they produce, and its effects
In your study of anatomy and physiology, you have already encountered a few of the many organs of the body that
have secondary endocrine functions. Here, you will learn about the hormone-producing activities of the heart,
gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, skeleton, adipose tissue, skin, and thymus.
Heart
When the body experiences an increase in blood volume or pressure, the cells of the heart’s atrial wall stretch. In
response, specialized cells in the wall of the atria produce and secrete the peptide hormone atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP). ANP signals the kidneys to reduce sodium reabsorption, thereby decreasing the amount of water
reabsorbed from the urine filtrate and reducing blood volume. Other actions of ANP include the inhibition of renin
secretion, thus inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and vasodilation. Therefore, ANP aids
in decreasing blood pressure, blood volume, and blood sodium levels.
Gastrointestinal Tract
The endocrine cells of the GI tract are located in the mucosa of the stomach and small intestine. Some of these
hormones are secreted in response to eating a meal and aid in digestion. An example of a hormone secreted by the
stomach cells is gastrin, a peptide hormone secreted in response to stomach distention that stimulates the release
of hydrochloric acid. Secretin is a peptide hormone secreted by the small intestine as acidic chyme (partially
digested food and fluid) moves from the stomach. It stimulates the release of bicarbonate from the pancreas, which
buffers the acidic chyme, and inhibits the further secretion of hydrochloric acid by the stomach. Cholecystokinin
(CCK) is another peptide hormone released from the small intestine. It promotes the secretion of pancreatic
enzymes and the release of bile from the gallbladder, both of which facilitate digestion. Other hormones produced
by the intestinal cells aid in glucose metabolism, such as by stimulating the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin,
reducing glucagon secretion from the alpha cells, or enhancing cellular sensitivity to insulin.
Kidneys
The kidneys participate in several complex endocrine pathways and produce certain hormones. A decline in blood
flow to the kidneys stimulates them to release the enzyme renin, triggering the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
(RAAS) system, and stimulating the reabsorption of sodium and water. The reabsorption increases blood flow and
blood pressure. The kidneys also play a role in regulating blood calcium levels through the production of calcitriol
from vitamin D3, which is released in response to the secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH). In addition, the
kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin (EPO) in response to low oxygen levels. EPO stimulates the
production of red blood cells (erythrocytes) in the bone marrow, thereby increasing oxygen delivery to tissues. You
may have heard of EPO as a performance-enhancing drug (in a synthetic form).
Skeleton
Although bone has long been recognized as a target for hormones, only recently have researchers recognized that
the skeleton itself produces at least two hormones. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is produced by bone cells in
response to increased blood levels of vitamin D3 or phosphate. It triggers the kidneys to inhibit the formation of
calcitriol from vitamin D3 and to increase phosphorus excretion. Osteocalcin, produced by osteoblasts, stimulates
the pancreatic beta cells to increase insulin production. It also acts on peripheral tissues to increase their sensitivity
to insulin and their utilization of glucose.
Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue produces and secretes several hormones involved in lipid metabolism and storage. One important
example is leptin, a protein manufactured by adipose cells that circulates in amounts directly proportional to levels
of body fat. Leptin is released in response to food consumption and acts by binding to brain neurons involved in
energy intake and expenditure. Binding of leptin produces a feeling of satiety after a meal, thereby reducing
appetite. It also appears that the binding of leptin to brain receptors triggers the sympathetic nervous system to
regulate bone metabolism, increasing deposition of cortical bone. Adiponectin—another hormone synthesized by
adipose cells—appears to reduce cellular insulin resistance and to protect blood vessels from inflammation and
atherosclerosis. Its levels are lower in people who are obese, and rise following weight loss.
Skin
The skin functions as an endocrine organ in the production of the inactive form of vitamin D3, cholecalciferol. When
cholesterol present in the epidermis is exposed to ultraviolet radiation, it is converted to cholecalciferol, which then
enters the blood. In the liver, cholecalciferol is converted to an intermediate that travels to the kidneys and is further
converted to calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D3. Vitamin D is important in a variety of physiological processes,
including intestinal calcium absorption and immune system function. In some studies, low levels of vitamin D have
been associated with increased risks of cancer, severe asthma, and multiple sclerosis. Vitamin D deficiency in
children causes rickets, and in adults, osteomalacia—both of which are characterized by bone deterioration.

Thymus
The thymus is an organ of the immune system that is larger and more active during infancy and early childhood, and
begins to atrophy as we age. Its endocrine function is the production of a group of hormones called thymosins that
contribute to the development and differentiation of T lymphocytes, which are immune cells. Although the role of
thymosins is not yet well understood, it is clear that they contribute to the immune response. Thymosins have been
found in tissues other than the thymus and have a wide variety of functions, so the thymosins cannot be strictly
categorized as thymic hormones.
Liver
The liver is responsible for secreting at least four important hormones or hormone precursors: insulin-like growth
factor (somatomedin), angiotensinogen, thrombopoietin, and hepcidin. Insulin-like growth factor-1 is the immediate
stimulus for growth in the body, especially of the bones. Angiotensinogen is the precursor to angiotensin, mentioned
earlier, which increases blood pressure. Thrombopoietin stimulates the production of the blood’s platelets.
Hepcidins block the release of iron from cells in the body, helping to regulate iron homeostasis in our body fluids.
The major hormones of these other organs are summarized in Table 17.8.
Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions and Their Major Hormones
Organ
Major hormones
Effects
Heart
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
Reduces blood volume, blood pressure, and
Na+ concentration
Gastrointestinal
tract
Gastrin, secretin, and cholecystokinin
Aid digestion of food and buffering of
stomach acids
Gastrointestinal
tract
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide
(GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)
Stimulate beta cells of the pancreas to
release insulin
Kidneys
Renin
Stimulates release of aldosterone
Kidneys
Calcitriol
Aids in the absorption of Ca2+
Kidneys
Erythropoietin
Triggers the formation of red blood cells in
the bone marrow
Skeleton
FGF23
Inhibits production of calcitriol and increases
phosphate excretion
Skeleton
Osteocalcin
Increases insulin production
Adipose tissue
Leptin
Promotes satiety signals in the brain
Adipose tissue
Adiponectin
Reduces insulin resistance
Skin
Cholecalciferol
Modified to form vitamin D
Thymus (and
other organs)
Thymosins
Among other things, aids in the development
of T lymphocytes of the immune system
TABLE 17.8

Organ
Major hormones
Effects
Liver
Insulin-like growth factor-1
Stimulates bodily growth
Liver
Angiotensinogen
Raises blood pressure
Liver
Thrombopoietin
Causes increase in platelets
Liver
Hepcidin
Blocks release of iron into body fluids
TABLE 17.8
