11.4 Axial Muscles of the Abdominal Wall, and Thorax
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the intrinsic skeletal muscles of the back and neck, and the skeletal muscles of the abdominal wall and
thorax
•
Identify the movement and function of the intrinsic skeletal muscles of the back and neck, and the skeletal
muscles of the abdominal wall and thorax
It is a complex job to balance the body on two feet and walk upright. The muscles of the vertebral column, thorax,
and abdominal wall extend, flex, and stabilize different parts of the body’s trunk. The deep muscles of the core of
the body help maintain posture as well as carry out other functions. The brain sends out electrical impulses to these
various muscle groups to control posture by alternate contraction and relaxation. This is necessary so that no single
muscle group becomes fatigued too quickly. If any one group fails to function, body posture will be compromised.
Muscles of the Abdomen
There are four pairs of abdominal muscles that cover the anterior and lateral abdominal region and meet at the
anterior midline. These muscles of the anterolateral abdominal wall can be divided into four groups: the external
obliques, the internal obliques, the transversus abdominis, and the rectus abdominis (Figure 11.16 and Table 11.6).

FIGURE 11.16
Muscles of the Abdomen
(a) The anterior abdominal muscles include the medially located rectus abdominis, which is
covered by a sheet of connective tissue called the rectus sheath. On the flanks of the body, medial to the rectus abdominis, the abdominal
wall is composed of three layers. The external oblique muscles form the superficial layer, while the internal oblique muscles form the
middle layer, and the transversus abdominis forms the deepest layer. (b) The muscles of the lower back move the lumbar spine but also
assist in femur movements.

Muscles of the Abdomen
Movement
Target
Target
motion
direction
Prime mover
Origin
Insertion
Twisting at waist; also bending to the
side
Vertebral
column
Supination;
lateral
flexion
External
obliques;
internal
obliques
Ribs
5–12;
ilium
Ribs 7–10;
linea alba;
ilium
Squeezing abdomen during forceful
exhalations, defecation, urination, and
childbirth
Abdominal
cavity
Compression
Transversus
abdominis
Ilium;
ribs
5–10
Sternum;
linea alba;
pubis
Sitting up
Vertebral
column
Flexion
Rectus
abdominis
Pubis
Sternum;
ribs 5 and
7
Bending to the side
Vertebral
column
Lateral
flexion
Quadratus
lumborum
Ilium;
ribs
5–10
Rib 12;
vertebrae
L1–L4
TABLE 11.6
There are three flat skeletal muscles in the antero-lateral wall of the abdomen. The external oblique, closest to the
surface, extend inferiorly and medially, in the direction of sliding one’s four fingers into pants pockets. Perpendicular
to it is the intermediate internal oblique, extending superiorly and medially, the direction the thumbs usually go
when the other fingers are in the pants pocket. The deep muscle, the transversus abdominis, is arranged
transversely around the abdomen, similar to the front of a belt on a pair of pants. This arrangement of three bands of
muscles in different orientations allows various movements and rotations of the trunk. The three layers of muscle
also help to protect the internal abdominal organs in an area where there is no bone.
The linea alba is a white, fibrous band that is made of the bilateral rectus sheaths that join at the anterior midline of
the body. These enclose the rectus abdominis muscles (a pair of long, linear muscles, commonly called the “sit-up”
muscles) that originate at the pubic crest and symphysis, and extend the length of the body’s trunk. Each muscle is
segmented by three transverse bands of collagen fibers called the tendinous intersections. This results in the look
of “six-pack abs,” as each segment hypertrophies on individuals at the gym who do many sit-ups.
The posterior abdominal wall is formed by the lumbar vertebrae, parts of the ilia of the hip bones, psoas major and
iliacus muscles, and quadratus lumborum muscle. This part of the core plays a key role in stabilizing the rest of the
body and maintaining posture.
CAREER CONNECTION
Physical Therapists
Those who have a muscle or joint injury will most likely be sent to a physical therapist (PT) after seeing their regular
doctor. PTs have a master’s degree or doctorate, and are highly trained experts in the mechanics of body
movements. Many PTs also specialize in sports injuries.
If you injured your shoulder while you were kayaking, the first thing a physical therapist would do during your first
visit is to assess the functionality of the joint. The range of motion of a particular joint refers to the normal
movements the joint performs. The PT will ask you to abduct and adduct, circumduct, and flex and extend the arm.
The PT will note the shoulder’s degree of function, and based on the assessment of the injury, will create an
appropriate physical therapy plan.
The first step in physical therapy will probably be applying a heat pack to the injured site, which acts much like a
warm-up to draw blood to the area, to enhance healing. You will be instructed to do a series of exercises to continue
the therapy at home, followed by icing, to decrease inflammation and swelling, which will continue for several
weeks. When physical therapy is complete, the PT will do an exit exam and send a detailed report on the improved
range of motion and return of normal limb function to your doctor. Gradually, as the injury heals, the shoulder will
begin to function correctly. A PT works closely with patients to help them get back to their normal level of physical
activity.
Muscles of the Thorax
The muscles of the chest serve to facilitate breathing by changing the size of the thoracic cavity (Table 11.7). When
you inhale, your chest rises because the cavity expands. Alternately, when you exhale, your chest falls because the
thoracic cavity decreases in size.
Muscles of the Thorax
Movement
Target
Target motion direction
Prime
mover
Origin
Insertion
Inhalation;
exhalation
Thoracic
cavity
Compression; expansion
Diaphragm
Sternum; ribs
6–12; lumbar
vertebrae
Central
tendon
Inhalation;exhalation
Ribs
Elevation (expands
thoracic cavity)
External
intercostals
Rib superior
to each
intercostal
muscle
Rib inferior to
each
intercostal
muscle
Forced exhalation
Ribs
Movement along
superior/inferior axis to
bring ribs closer together
Internal
intercostals
Rib inferior to
each
intercostal
muscle
Rib superior
to each
intercostal
muscle
TABLE 11.7
The Diaphragm
The change in volume of the thoracic cavity during breathing is due to the alternate contraction and relaxation of the
diaphragm (Figure 11.17). It separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities, and is dome-shaped at rest. The
superior surface of the diaphragm is convex, creating the elevated floor of the thoracic cavity. The inferior surface is
concave, creating the curved roof of the abdominal cavity.

FIGURE 11.17
Muscles of the Diaphragm
The diaphragm separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
Defecating, urination, and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and abdominal muscles (this
cooperation is referred to as the “Valsalva maneuver”). You hold your breath by a steady contraction of the
diaphragm; this stabilizes the volume and pressure of the peritoneal cavity. When the abdominal muscles contract,
the pressure cannot push the diaphragm up, so it increases pressure on the intestinal tract (defecation), urinary
tract (urination), or reproductive tract (childbirth).
The inferior surface of the pericardial sac and the inferior surfaces of the pleural membranes (parietal pleura) fuse
onto the central tendon of the diaphragm. To the sides of the tendon are the skeletal muscle portions of the
diaphragm, which insert into the tendon while having a number of origins including the xiphoid process of the
sternum anteriorly, the inferior six ribs and their cartilages laterally, and the lumbar vertebrae and 12th ribs
posteriorly.
The diaphragm also includes three openings for the passage of structures between the thorax and the abdomen.
The inferior vena cava passes through the caval opening, and the esophagus and attached nerves pass through the
esophageal hiatus. The aorta, thoracic duct, and azygous vein pass through the aortic hiatus of the posterior
diaphragm.
The Intercostal Muscles
There are three sets of muscles, called intercostal muscles, which span each of the intercostal spaces. The
principal role of the intercostal muscles is to assist in breathing by changing the dimensions of the rib cage (Figure
11.18).

FIGURE 11.18
Intercostal Muscles
The external intercostals are located laterally on the sides of the body. The internal intercostals are
located medially near the sternum. The innermost intercostals are located deep to both the internal and external intercostals.
The 11 pairs of superficial external intercostal muscles aid in inspiration of air during breathing because when they
contract, they raise the rib cage, which expands it. The 11 pairs of internal intercostal muscles, just under the
externals, are used for expiration because they draw the ribs together to constrict the rib cage. The innermost
intercostal muscles are the deepest, and they act as synergists for the action of the internal intercostals.
Muscles of the Pelvic Floor and Perineum
The pelvic floor is a muscular sheet that defines the inferior portion of the pelvic cavity. The pelvic diaphragm,
spanning anteriorly to posteriorly from the pubis to the coccyx, comprises the levator ani and the ischiococcygeus.
Its openings include the anal canal and urethra, and the vagina in females.
The large levator ani consists of two skeletal muscles, the pubococcygeus and the iliococcygeus (Figure 11.19).
The levator ani is considered the most important muscle of the pelvic floor because it supports the pelvic viscera. It
resists the pressure produced by contraction of the abdominal muscles so that the pressure is applied to the colon
to aid in defecation and to the uterus to aid in childbirth (assisted by the ischiococcygeus, which pulls the coccyx
anteriorly). This muscle also creates skeletal muscle sphincters at the urethra and anus.

FIGURE 11.19
Muscles of the Pelvic Floor
The pelvic floor muscles support the pelvic organs, resist intra-abdominal pressure, and
work as sphincters for the urethra, rectum, and vagina.
The perineum is the diamond-shaped space between the pubic symphysis (anteriorly), the coccyx (posteriorly), and
the ischial tuberosities (laterally), lying just inferior to the pelvic diaphragm (levator ani and coccygeus). Divided
transversely into triangles, the anterior is the urogenital triangle, which includes the external genitals. The
posterior is the anal triangle, which contains the anus (Figure 11.20). The perineum is also divided into superficial
and deep layers with some of the muscles common to people of any sex (Figure 11.21). Females also have the
compressor urethrae and the sphincter urethrovaginalis, which function to close the vagina. In males, there is the
deep transverse perineal muscle that plays a role in ejaculation.
FIGURE 11.20
Muscles of the Perineum
The perineum muscles play roles in urination in both sexes, ejaculation in males, and vaginal
contraction in females.
