18.6 Blood Typing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the two basic physiological consequences of transfusion of incompatible blood
•
Compare and contrast ABO and Rh blood groups
•
Identify which blood groups may be safely transfused into patients with different ABO types
•
Discuss the pathophysiology of hemolytic disease of the newborn
Blood transfusions in humans were risky procedures until the discovery of the major human blood groups by Karl
Landsteiner, an Austrian biologist and physician, in 1900. Until that point, physicians did not understand that death
sometimes followed blood transfusions, when the type of donor blood infused into the patient was incompatible
with the patient’s own blood. Blood groups are determined by the presence or absence of specific marker molecules
on the plasma membranes of erythrocytes. With their discovery, it became possible for the first time to match
patient-donor blood types and prevent transfusion reactions and deaths.
Antigens, Antibodies, and Transfusion Reactions
Antigens are substances that the body does not recognize as belonging to the “self” and that therefore trigger a
defensive response from the leukocytes of the immune system. (Seek more content for additional information on
immunity.) Here, we will focus on the role of immunity in blood transfusion reactions. With RBCs in particular, you
may see the antigens referred to as isoantigens or agglutinogens (surface antigens) and the antibodies referred to as
isoantibodies or agglutinins. In this chapter, we will use the more common terms antigens and antibodies.
Antigens are generally large proteins, but may include other classes of organic molecules, including carbohydrates,
lipids, and nucleic acids. Following an infusion of incompatible blood, erythrocytes with foreign antigens appear in
the bloodstream and trigger an immune response. Proteins called antibodies (immunoglobulins), which are
produced by certain B lymphocytes called plasma cells, attach to the antigens on the plasma membranes of the
infused erythrocytes and cause them to adhere to one another.
•
Because the arms of the Y-shaped antibodies attach randomly to more than one nonself erythrocyte surface,
they form clumps of erythrocytes. This process is called agglutination.
•
The clumps of erythrocytes block small blood vessels throughout the body, depriving tissues of oxygen and
nutrients.
•
As the erythrocyte clumps are degraded, in a process called hemolysis, their hemoglobin is released into the
bloodstream. This hemoglobin travels to the kidneys, which are responsible for filtration of the blood. However,
the load of hemoglobin released can easily overwhelm the kidney’s capacity to clear it, and the patient can
quickly develop kidney failure.
More than 50 antigens have been identified on erythrocyte membranes, but the most significant in terms of their
potential harm to patients are classified in two groups: the ABO blood group and the Rh blood group.
The ABO Blood Group
Although the ABO blood group name consists of three letters, ABO blood typing designates the presence or
absence of just two antigens, A and B. Both are glycoproteins. People whose erythrocytes have A antigens on their
erythrocyte membrane surfaces are designated blood type A, and those whose erythrocytes have B antigens are
blood type B. People can also have both A and B antigens on their erythrocytes, in which case they are blood type
AB. People with neither A nor B antigens are designated blood type O. ABO blood types are genetically determined.
The body must be exposed to a foreign antigen before an antibody can be produced. ABO blood group antigens are
found in foods and microbes throughout nature. Thus, the human immune system is exposed to A and B antigens at
an early age and antibodies are formed naturally. Individuals with type A blood—without any prior exposure to
incompatible blood—have naturally-formed antibodies to the B antigen circulating in their blood plasma. These
antibodies, referred to as anti-B antibodies, will cause agglutination and hemolysis if they ever encounter
erythrocytes with B antigens. Similarly, an individual with type B blood has naturally-formed anti-A antibodies.
Individuals with type AB blood, which has both antigens, do not have naturally-formed antibodies to either of these.
People with type O blood lack antigens A and B on their erythrocytes, but both anti-A and anti-B antibodies circulate
in their blood plasma.
Rh Blood Groups
The Rh blood group is classified according to the presence or absence of a second erythrocyte antigen identified as
Rh. (It was first discovered in a type of primate known as a rhesus macaque, which is often used in research,
because its blood is similar to that of humans.) Although dozens of Rh antigens have been identified, only one,
designated D, is clinically important. Those who have the Rh D antigen present on their erythrocytes—about 85
percent of Americans—are described as Rh positive (Rh+) and those who lack it are Rh negative (Rh−). Note that the
Rh group is distinct from the ABO group, so any individual, no matter their ABO blood type, may have or lack this Rh
antigen. When identifying a patient’s blood type, the Rh group is designated by adding the word positive or negative
to the ABO type. For example, A positive (A+) means ABO group A blood with the Rh antigen present, and AB
negative (AB−) means ABO group AB blood without the Rh antigen.
Table 18.2 summarizes the distribution of the ABO and Rh blood types within the United States.
Summary of ABO and Rh Blood Types within the United States
Blood Type
Asian
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
North American Indian
White non-Hispanic
A+
27.3
24.0
28.7
31.3
33.0
A−
0.5
1.9
2.4
3.8
6.8
B+
25.0
18.4
9.2
7.0
9.1
B−
0.4
1.3
0.7
0.9
1.8
AB+
7.0
4.0
2.3
2.2
3.4
AB−
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.7
TABLE 18.2

Blood Type
Asian
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
North American Indian
White non-Hispanic
O+
39.0
46.6
52.6
50.0
37.2
O−
0.7
3.6
3.9
4.7
8.0
TABLE 18.2
In contrast to the ABO group antibodies, which are preformed, antibodies to the Rh antigen are produced only in Rh−
individuals after exposure to the antigen. This process, called sensitization, occurs following a transfusion with Rh-
incompatible blood or, more commonly, with the birth of an Rh+ baby to an Rh− person. Problems are rare in a first
pregnancy, since the baby’s Rh+ cells rarely cross the placenta (the organ of gas and nutrient exchange between the
fetus and the pregnant person). However, during or immediately after birth, the Rh− parent can be exposed to the
baby’s Rh+ cells (Figure 18.15). Research has shown that this occurs in about 13−14 percent of such pregnancies.
After exposure, the immune system of the person who has given birth begins to generate anti-Rh antibodies. If the
same person should then become pregnant with another Rh+ baby, the Rh antibodies they have produced can cross
the placenta into the fetal bloodstream and destroy the fetal RBCs. This condition, known as hemolytic disease of
the newborn (HDN) or erythroblastosis fetalis, may cause anemia in mild cases, but the agglutination and
hemolysis can be so severe that without treatment the fetus may die in the womb or shortly after birth.
FIGURE 18.15
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
The first exposure of an Rh− person to Rh+ erythrocytes during pregnancy induces
sensitization. Anti-Rh antibodies begin to circulate in the pregnant person's bloodstream. A second exposure occurs with a subsequent
pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus in the uterus. During that subsequent pregnancy, the pregnant person's anti-Rh antibodies may cross the
placenta and enter the fetal bloodstream, causing agglutination and hemolysis of fetal erythrocytes.
A drug known as RhoGAM, short for Rh immune globulin, can temporarily prevent the development of Rh antibodies
in the Rh− parent, thereby averting this potentially serious disease for the fetus. RhoGAM antibodies destroy any
fetal Rh+ erythrocytes that may cross the placental barrier. RhoGAM is normally administered to Rh− pregnant
people during weeks 26−28 of pregnancy and within 72 hours following birth. It has proven remarkably effective in
decreasing the incidence of HDN. Earlier we noted that the incidence of HDN in an Rh+ subsequent pregnancy to an
Rh− person is about 13–14 percent without preventive treatment. Since the introduction of RhoGAM in 1968, the
incidence has dropped to about 0.1 percent in the United States.
Determining ABO Blood Types
Clinicians are able to determine a patient’s blood type quickly and easily using commercially prepared antibodies.
An unknown blood sample is allocated into separate wells. Into one well a small amount of anti-A antibody is
added, and to another a small amount of anti-B antibody. If the antigen is present, the antibodies will cause visible
agglutination of the cells (Figure 18.16). The blood should also be tested for Rh antibodies.
FIGURE 18.16
Cross Matching Blood Types
This sample of a commercially produced “bedside” card enables quick typing of both a
recipient’s and donor’s blood before transfusion. The card contains three reaction sites or wells. One is coated with an anti-A antibody, one
with an anti-B antibody, and one with an anti-D antibody (tests for the presence of Rh factor D). Mixing a drop of blood and saline into each
well enables the blood to interact with a preparation of type-specific antibodies, also called anti-seras. Agglutination of RBCs in a given site
indicates a positive identification of the blood antigens, in this case A and Rh antigens for blood type A+. For the purpose of transfusion, the
donor’s and recipient’s blood types must match.
ABO Transfusion Protocols
To avoid transfusion reactions, it is best to transfuse only matching blood types; that is, a type B+ recipient should
ideally receive blood only from a type B+ donor and so on. That said, in emergency situations, when acute
hemorrhage threatens the patient’s life, there may not be time for cross matching to identify blood type. In these
cases, blood from a universal donor—an individual with type O− blood—may be transfused. Recall that type O
erythrocytes do not display A or B antigens. Thus, anti-A or anti-B antibodies that might be circulating in the
patient’s blood plasma will not encounter any erythrocyte surface antigens on the donated blood and therefore will
not be provoked into a response. One problem with this designation of universal donor is if the O− individual had
prior exposure to Rh antigen, Rh antibodies may be present in the donated blood. Also, introducing type O blood into
an individual with type A, B, or AB blood will nevertheless introduce antibodies against both A and B antigens, as
these are always circulating in the type O blood plasma. This may cause problems for the recipient, but because the
volume of blood transfused is much lower than the volume of the patient’s own blood, the adverse effects of the
relatively few infused plasma antibodies are typically limited. Rh factor also plays a role. If Rh− individuals receiving
blood have had prior exposure to Rh antigen, antibodies for this antigen may be present in the blood and trigger
agglutination to some degree. Although it is always preferable to cross match a patient’s blood before transfusing, in
a true life-threatening emergency situation, this is not always possible, and these procedures may be implemented.
A patient with blood type AB+ is known as the universal recipient. This patient can theoretically receive any type of
blood, because the patient’s own blood—having both A and B antigens on the erythrocyte surface—does not
produce anti-A or anti-B antibodies. In addition, an Rh+ patient can receive both Rh+ and Rh− blood. However, keep
in mind that the donor’s blood will contain circulating antibodies, again with possible negative implications. Figure
18.17 summarizes the blood types and compatibilities.
