15.1 Divisions of the Autonomic Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Name the components that generate the sympathetic and parasympathetic responses of the autonomic
nervous system
•
Explain the differences in output connections within the two divisions of the autonomic nervous system
•
Describe the signaling molecules and receptor proteins involved in communication within the two divisions of
the autonomic nervous system
The nervous system can be divided into two functional parts: the somatic nervous system and the autonomic
nervous system. The major differences between the two systems are evident in the responses that each produces.
The somatic nervous system causes contraction of skeletal muscles. The autonomic nervous system controls
cardiac and smooth muscle, as well as glandular tissue. The somatic nervous system is associated with voluntary
responses (though many can happen without conscious awareness, like breathing), and the autonomic nervous
system is associated with involuntary responses, such as those related to homeostasis.
The autonomic nervous system regulates many of the internal organs through a balance of two aspects, or divisions.
In addition to the endocrine system, the autonomic nervous system is instrumental in homeostatic mechanisms in
the body. The two divisions of the autonomic nervous system are the sympathetic division and the
parasympathetic division. The sympathetic system is associated with the fight-or-flight response, and
parasympathetic activity is referred to by the epithet of rest and digest. Homeostasis is the balance between the
two systems. At each target effector, dual innervation determines activity. For example, the heart receives
connections from both the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. One causes heart rate to increase, whereas
the other causes heart rate to decrease.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/fightflight) to learn more about adrenaline and the fight-or-flight response.
When someone is said to have a rush of adrenaline, the image of bungee jumpers or skydivers usually comes to
mind. But adrenaline, also known as epinephrine, is an important chemical in coordinating the body’s fight-or-flight
response. In this video, you look inside the physiology of the fight-or-flight response, as envisioned for a firefighter.
His body’s reaction is the result of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system causing system-wide
changes as it prepares for extreme responses. What two changes does adrenaline bring about to help the skeletal
muscle response?
Sympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
To respond to a threat—to fight or to run away—the sympathetic system causes divergent effects as many different
effector organs are activated together for a common purpose. More oxygen needs to be inhaled and delivered to
skeletal muscle. The respiratory, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal systems are all activated together.
Additionally, sweating keeps the excess heat that comes from muscle contraction from causing the body to
overheat. The digestive system shuts down so that blood is not absorbing nutrients when it should be delivering
oxygen to skeletal muscles. To coordinate all these responses, the connections in the sympathetic system diverge
from a limited region of the central nervous system (CNS) to a wide array of ganglia that project to the many effector
organs simultaneously. The complex set of structures that compose the output of the sympathetic system make it
possible for these disparate effectors to come together in a coordinated, systemic change.
The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system influences the various organ systems of the body through
connections emerging from the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord. It is referred to as the thoracolumbar
system to reflect this anatomical basis. A central neuron in the lateral horn of any of these spinal regions projects
to ganglia adjacent to the vertebral column through the ventral spinal roots. The majority of ganglia of the
sympathetic system belong to a network of sympathetic chain ganglia that runs alongside the vertebral column.
The ganglia appear as a series of clusters of neurons linked by axonal bridges. There are typically 23 ganglia in the
chain on either side of the spinal column. Three correspond to the cervical region, 12 are in the thoracic region, four
are in the lumbar region, and four correspond to the sacral region. The cervical and sacral levels are not connected
to the spinal cord directly through the spinal roots, but through ascending or descending connections through the
bridges within the chain.
A diagram that shows the connections of the sympathetic system is somewhat like a circuit diagram that shows the
electrical connections between different receptacles and devices. In Figure 15.2, the “circuits” of the sympathetic
system are intentionally simplified.

FIGURE 15.2
Connections of Sympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
Neurons from the lateral horn of the spinal
cord (preganglionic nerve fibers - solid lines)) project to the chain ganglia on either side of the vertebral column or to collateral
(prevertebral) ganglia that are anterior to the vertebral column in the abdominal cavity. Axons from these ganglionic neurons
(postganglionic nerve fibers - dotted lines) then project to target effectors throughout the body.
To continue with the analogy of the circuit diagram, there are three different types of “junctions” that operate within
the sympathetic system (Figure 15.3). The first type is most direct: the sympathetic nerve projects to the chain
ganglion at the same level as the target effector (the organ, tissue, or gland to be innervated). An example of this
type is spinal nerve T1 that synapses with the T1 chain ganglion to innervate the trachea. The fibers of this branch
are called white rami communicantes (singular = ramus communicans); they are myelinated and therefore referred
to as white (see Figure 15.3a). The axon from the central neuron (the preganglionic fiber shown as a solid line)
synapses with the ganglionic neuron (with the postganglionic fiber shown as a dashed line). This neuron then
projects to a target effector—in this case, the trachea—via gray rami communicantes, which are unmyelinated
axons.
In some cases, the target effectors are located superior or inferior to the spinal segment at which the preganglionic
fiber emerges. With respect to the “wiring” involved, the synapse with the ganglionic neuron occurs at chain ganglia
superior or inferior to the location of the central neuron. An example of this is spinal nerve T1 that innervates the
eye. The spinal nerve tracks up through the chain until it reaches the superior cervical ganglion, where it synapses
with the postganglionic neuron (see Figure 15.3b). The cervical ganglia are referred to as paravertebral ganglia,
given their location adjacent to prevertebral ganglia in the sympathetic chain.
Not all axons from the central neurons terminate in the chain ganglia. Additional branches from the ventral nerve
root continue through the chain and on to one of the collateral ganglia as the greater splanchnic nerve or lesser
splanchnic nerve. For example, the greater splanchnic nerve at the level of T5 synapses with a collateral ganglion
outside the chain before making the connection to the postganglionic nerves that innervate the stomach (see Figure
15.3c).
Collateral ganglia, also called prevertebral ganglia, are situated anterior to the vertebral column and receive
inputs from splanchnic nerves as well as central sympathetic neurons. They are associated with controlling organs
in the abdominal cavity, and are also considered part of the enteric nervous system. The three collateral ganglia are
the celiac ganglion, the superior mesenteric ganglion, and the inferior mesenteric ganglion (see Figure 15.2). The
word celiac is derived from the Latin word “coelom,” which refers to a body cavity (in this case, the abdominal
cavity), and the word mesenteric refers to the digestive system.

FIGURE 15.3
Sympathetic Connections and Chain Ganglia
The axon from a central sympathetic neuron in the spinal cord can project
to the periphery in a number of different ways. (a) The fiber can project out to the ganglion at the same level and synapse on a ganglionic
neuron. (b) A branch can project to more superior or inferior ganglion in the chain. (c) A branch can project through the white ramus
communicans, but not terminate on a ganglionic neuron in the chain. Instead, it projects through one of the splanchnic nerves to a
collateral ganglion or the adrenal medulla (not pictured).
An axon from the central neuron that projects to a sympathetic ganglion is referred to as a preganglionic fiber or
neuron, and represents the output from the CNS to the ganglion. Because the sympathetic ganglia are adjacent to
the vertebral column, preganglionic sympathetic fibers are relatively short, and they are myelinated. A
postganglionic fiber—the axon from a ganglionic neuron that projects to the target effector—represents the output
of a ganglion that directly influences the organ. Compared with the preganglionic fibers, postganglionic sympathetic
fibers are long because of the relatively greater distance from the ganglion to the target effector. These fibers are
unmyelinated. (Note that the term “postganglionic neuron” may be used to describe the projection from a ganglion
to the target. The problem with that usage is that the cell body is in the ganglion, and only the fiber is postganglionic.
Typically, the term neuron applies to the entire cell.)
One type of preganglionic sympathetic fiber does not terminate in a ganglion. These are the axons from central
sympathetic neurons that project to the adrenal medulla, the interior portion of the adrenal gland. These axons are
still referred to as preganglionic fibers, but the target is not a ganglion. The adrenal medulla releases signaling
molecules into the bloodstream, rather than using axons to communicate with target structures. The cells in the
adrenal medulla that are contacted by the preganglionic fibers are called chromaffin cells. These cells are
neurosecretory cells that develop from the neural crest along with the sympathetic ganglia, reinforcing the idea that
the gland is, functionally, a sympathetic ganglion.
The projections of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system diverge widely, resulting in a broad
influence of the system throughout the body. As a response to a threat, the sympathetic system would increase
heart rate and breathing rate and cause blood flow to the skeletal muscle to increase and blood flow to the digestive
system to decrease. Sweat gland secretion should also increase as part of an integrated response. All of those
physiological changes are going to be required to occur together to run away from the hunting lioness, or the
modern equivalent. This divergence is seen in the branching patterns of preganglionic sympathetic neurons—a
single preganglionic sympathetic neuron may have 10–20 targets. An axon that leaves a central neuron of the lateral
horn in the thoracolumbar spinal cord will pass through the white ramus communicans and enter the sympathetic
chain, where it will branch toward a variety of targets. At the level of the spinal cord at which the preganglionic
sympathetic fiber exits the spinal cord, a branch will synapse on a neuron in the adjacent chain ganglion. Some
branches will extend up or down to a different level of the chain ganglia. Other branches will pass through the chain
ganglia and project through one of the splanchnic nerves to a collateral ganglion. Finally, some branches may project
through the splanchnic nerves to the adrenal medulla. All of these branches mean that one preganglionic neuron
can influence different regions of the sympathetic system very broadly, by acting on widely distributed organs.
Parasympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
The parasympathetic system can also be referred to as the craniosacral system (or outflow) because the
preganglionic neurons are located in nuclei of the brain stem and the lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord.
The connections, or “circuits,” of the parasympathetic division are similar to the general layout of the sympathetic
division with a few specific differences (Figure 15.4). The preganglionic fibers from the cranial region travel in cranial
nerves, whereas preganglionic fibers from the sacral region travel in spinal nerves. The targets of these fibers are
terminal ganglia, which are located near—or even within—the target effector. These ganglia are often referred to as
intramural ganglia when they are found within the walls of the target organ. The postganglionic fiber projects from
the terminal ganglia a short distance to the target effector, or to the specific target tissue within the organ.
Comparing the relative lengths of axons in the parasympathetic system, the preganglionic fibers are long and the
postganglionic fibers are short because the ganglia are close to—and sometimes within—the target effectors.
The cranial component of the parasympathetic system is based in particular nuclei of the brain stem. In the
midbrain, the Edinger–Westphal nucleus is part of the oculomotor complex, and axons from those neurons travel
with the fibers in the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III) that innervate the extraocular muscles. The preganglionic
parasympathetic fibers within cranial nerve III terminate in the ciliary ganglion, which is located in the posterior
orbit. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers then project to the smooth muscle of the iris to control pupillary
size. In the upper medulla, the salivatory nuclei contain neurons with axons that project through the facial and
glossopharyngeal nerves to ganglia that control salivary glands. Tear production is influenced by parasympathetic
fibers in the facial nerve, which activate a ganglion, and ultimately the lacrimal (tear) gland. Neurons in the dorsal
nucleus of the vagus nerve and the nucleus ambiguus project through the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) to the
terminal ganglia of the thoracic and abdominal cavities. Parasympathetic preganglionic fibers primarily influence the
heart, bronchi, and esophagus in the thoracic cavity and the stomach, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, and small
intestine of the abdominal cavity. The postganglionic fibers from the ganglia activated by the vagus nerve are often
incorporated into the structure of the organ, such as the mesenteric plexus of the digestive tract organs and the
intramural ganglia.

FIGURE 15.4
Connections of Parasympathetic Division of the Autonomic Nervous System
Neurons from brain-stem nuclei, or from
the lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord, project to terminal ganglia near or within the various organs of the body. Axons from these
ganglionic neurons then project the short distance to those target effectors.
Chemical Signaling in the Autonomic Nervous System
Where an autonomic neuron connects with a target, there is a synapse. The electrical signal of the action potential
causes the release of a signaling molecule, which will bind to receptor proteins on the target cell. Synapses of the
autonomic system are classified as either cholinergic, meaning that acetylcholine (ACh) is released, or adrenergic,
meaning that norepinephrine is released. The terms cholinergic and adrenergic refer not only to the signaling
molecule that is released but also to the class of receptors that each binds.
The cholinergic system includes two classes of receptor: the nicotinic receptor and the muscarinic receptor. Both
receptor types bind to ACh and cause changes in the target cell. The nicotinic receptor is a ligand-gated cation
channel and the muscarinic receptor is a G protein–coupled receptor. The receptors are named for, and
differentiated by, other molecules that bind to them. Whereas nicotine will bind to the nicotinic receptor, and
muscarine will bind to the muscarinic receptor, there is no cross-reactivity between the receptors. The situation is
similar to locks and keys. Imagine two locks—one for a classroom and the other for an office—that are opened by
two separate keys. The classroom key will not open the office door and the office key will not open the classroom
door. This is similar to the specificity of nicotine and muscarine for their receptors. However, a master key can open
multiple locks, such as a master key for the Biology Department that opens both the classroom and the office doors.
This is similar to ACh that binds to both types of receptors. The molecules that define these receptors are not
crucial—they are simply tools for researchers to use in the laboratory. These molecules are exogenous, meaning
that they are made outside of the human body, so a researcher can use them without any confounding endogenous
results (results caused by the molecules produced in the body).
The adrenergic system also has two types of receptors, named the alpha (α)-adrenergic receptor and beta (β)-
adrenergic receptor. Unlike cholinergic receptors, these receptor types are not classified by which drugs can bind
to them. All of them are G protein–coupled receptors. There are two types of α-adrenergic receptors, termed α1, and
α2, and there are three types of β-adrenergic receptors, termed β1, β2 and β3. An additional aspect of the adrenergic
system is that there is a second signaling molecule called epinephrine. The chemical difference between
norepinephrine and epinephrine is the addition of a methyl group (CH3) in epinephrine. The prefix “nor-” actually
refers to this chemical difference, in which a methyl group is missing.
The term adrenergic should remind you of the word adrenaline, which is associated with the fight-or-flight response
described at the beginning of the chapter. Adrenaline and epinephrine are two names for the same molecule. The
adrenal gland (in Latin, ad- = “on top of”; renal = “kidney”) secretes adrenaline. The ending “-ine” refers to the
chemical being derived, or extracted, from the adrenal gland. A similar construction from Greek instead of Latin
results in the word epinephrine (epi- = “above”; nephr- = “kidney”). In scientific usage, epinephrine is preferred in
the United States, whereas adrenaline is preferred in Great Britain, because “adrenalin” was once a registered,
proprietary drug name in the United States. Though the drug is no longer sold, the convention of referring to this
molecule by the two different names persists. Similarly, norepinephrine and noradrenaline are two names for the
same molecule.
Having understood the cholinergic and adrenergic systems, their role in the autonomic system is relatively simple to
understand. All preganglionic fibers, both sympathetic and parasympathetic, release ACh. All ganglionic
neurons—the targets of these preganglionic fibers—have nicotinic receptors in their cell membranes. The nicotinic
receptor is a ligand-gated cation channel that results in depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane. The
postganglionic parasympathetic fibers also release ACh, but the receptors on their targets are muscarinic receptors,
which are G protein–coupled receptors and do not exclusively cause depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane.
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, except for fibers that project to sweat glands and to
blood vessels associated with skeletal muscles, which release ACh (Table 15.1).

Autonomic System Signaling Molecules
Sympathetic
Parasympathetic
Preganglionic
Acetylcholine → nicotinic receptor
Acetylcholine →
nicotinic receptor
Postganglionic
Norepinephrine → α- or β-adrenergic receptors
Acetylcholine → muscarinic receptor (associated with sweat glands and
the blood vessels associated with skeletal muscles only
Acetylcholine →
muscarinic
receptor
TABLE 15.1
Signaling molecules can belong to two broad groups. Neurotransmitters are released at synapses, whereas
hormones are released into the bloodstream. These are simplistic definitions, but they can help to clarify this point.
Acetylcholine can be considered a neurotransmitter because it is released by axons at synapses. The adrenergic
system, however, presents a challenge. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine, which can be
considered a neurotransmitter. But the adrenal medulla releases epinephrine and norepinephrine into circulation, so
they should be considered hormones.
What are referred to here as synapses may not fit the strictest definition of synapse. Some sources will refer to the
connection between a postganglionic fiber and a target effector as neuroeffector junctions; neurotransmitters, as
defined above, would be called neuromodulators. The structure of postganglionic connections are not the typical
synaptic end bulb that is found at the neuromuscular junction, but rather are chains of swellings along the length of
a postganglionic fiber called a varicosity (Figure 15.5).
FIGURE 15.5
Autonomic Varicosities
The connection between autonomic fibers and target effectors is not the same as the typical
synapse, such as the neuromuscular junction. Instead of a synaptic end bulb, a neurotransmitter is released from swellings along the length
of a fiber that makes an extended network of connections in the target effector.
Everyday Connection
Fight or Flight? What About Fright and Freeze?
The original usage of the epithet “fight or flight” comes from a scientist named Walter Cannon who worked at
Harvard in 1915. The concept of homeostasis and the functioning of the sympathetic system had been
introduced in France in the previous century. Cannon expanded the idea, and introduced the idea that an animal
responds to a threat by preparing to stand and fight or run away. The nature of this response was thoroughly
explained in a book on the physiology of pain, hunger, fear, and rage.
When students learn about the sympathetic system and the fight-or-flight response, they often stop and wonder
about other responses. If you were faced with a lioness running toward you as pictured at the beginning of this
chapter, would you run or would you stand your ground? Some people would say that they would freeze and not
know what to do. So isn’t there really more to what the autonomic system does than fight, flight, rest, or digest.
What about fear and paralysis in the face of a threat?
The common epithet of “fight or flight” is being enlarged to be “fight, flight, or fright” or even “fight, flight, fright,
or freeze.” Cannon’s original contribution was a catchy phrase to express some of what the nervous system does
in response to a threat, but it is incomplete. The sympathetic system is responsible for the physiological
responses to emotional states. The name “sympathetic” can be said to mean that (sym- = “together”; -pathos =
“pain,” “suffering,” or “emotion”).


INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/nervsystem1) to learn more about the nervous system. As described in this
video, the nervous system has a way to deal with threats and stress that is separate from the conscious control of
the somatic nervous system. The system comes from a time when threats were about survival, but in the modern
age, these responses become part of stress and anxiety. This video describes how the autonomic system is only part
of the response to threats, or stressors. What other organ system gets involved, and what part of the brain
coordinates the two systems for the entire response, including epinephrine (adrenaline) and cortisol?
