25.1 Physical Characteristics of Urine
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast blood plasma, glomerular filtrate, and urine characteristics
•
Describe the characteristics of a normal urine sample, including normal range of pH, osmolarity, and volume
The urinary system’s ability to filter the blood resides in about 2 to 3 million tufts of specialized capillaries—the
glomeruli—distributed more or less equally between the two kidneys. Because the glomeruli filter the blood based
mostly on particle size, large elements like blood cells, platelets, antibodies, and albumen are excluded. The
glomerulus is the first part of the nephron, which then continues as a highly specialized tubular structure
responsible for creating the final urine composition. All other solutes, such as ions, amino acids, vitamins, and
wastes, are filtered to create a filtrate composition very similar to plasma. The glomeruli create about 200 liters
(189 quarts) of this filtrate every day, yet you excrete less than two liters of waste you call urine.
Characteristics of the urine change, depending on influences such as water intake, exercise, environmental
temperature, nutrient intake, and other factors (Table 25.1). Some of the characteristics such as color and odor are
rough descriptors of your state of hydration. For example, if you exercise or work outside, and sweat a great deal,
your urine will turn darker and produce a slight odor, even if you drink plenty of water. Athletes are often advised to
consume water until their urine is clear. This is good advice; however, it takes time for the kidneys to process body
fluids and store it in the bladder. Another way of looking at this is that the quality of the urine produced is an average
over the time it takes to make that urine. Producing clear urine may take only a few minutes if you are drinking a lot
of water or several hours if you are working outside and not drinking much.

Normal Urine Characteristics
Characteristic
Normal values
Color
Pale yellow to deep amber
Odor
Odorless
Volume
750–2000 mL/24 hour
pH
4.5–8.0
Specific gravity
1.003–1.032
TABLE 25.1

Characteristic
Normal values
Osmolarity
40–1350 mOsmol/kg
Urobilinogen
0.2–1.0 mg/100 mL
White blood cells
0–2 HPF (per high-power field of microscope)
Leukocyte esterase
None
Protein
None or trace
Bilirubin
<0.3 mg/100 mL
Ketones
None
Nitrites
None
Blood
None
Glucose
None
TABLE 25.1

Urinalysis (urine analysis) often provides clues to renal disease. Normally, only traces of protein are found in urine,
and when higher amounts are found, damage to the glomeruli is the likely basis. Unusually large quantities of urine
may point to diseases like diabetes mellitus or hypothalamic tumors that cause diabetes insipidus. The color of
urine is determined mostly by the breakdown products of red blood cell destruction (Figure 25.2). The “heme” of
hemoglobin is converted by the liver into water-soluble forms that can be excreted into the bile and indirectly into
the urine. This yellow pigment is urochrome. Urine color may also be affected by certain foods like beets, berries,
and fava beans. A kidney stone or a cancer of the urinary system may produce sufficient bleeding to manifest as pink
or even bright red urine. Diseases of the liver or obstructions of bile drainage from the liver impart a dark “tea” or
“cola” hue to the urine. Dehydration produces darker, concentrated urine that may also possess the slight odor of
ammonia. Most of the ammonia produced from protein breakdown is converted into urea by the liver, so ammonia is
rarely detected in fresh urine. The strong ammonia odor you may detect in bathrooms or alleys is due to the
breakdown of urea into ammonia by bacteria in the environment. About one in five people detect a distinctive odor
in their urine after consuming asparagus; other foods such as onions, garlic, and fish can impart their own aromas!
These food-caused odors are harmless.

FIGURE 25.2
Urine Color
Urine volume varies considerably. The normal range is one to two liters per day (Table 25.2). The kidneys must
produce a minimum urine volume of about 500 mL/day to rid the body of wastes. Output below this level may be
caused by severe dehydration or renal disease and is termed oliguria. The virtual absence of urine production is
termed anuria. Excessive urine production is polyuria, which may be due to diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus.
In diabetes mellitus, blood glucose levels exceed the number of available sodium-glucose transporters in the
kidney, and glucose appears in the urine. The osmotic nature of glucose attracts water, leading to its loss in the
urine. In the case of diabetes insipidus, insufficient pituitary antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release or insufficient
numbers of ADH receptors in the collecting ducts means that too few water channels are inserted into the cell
membranes that line the collecting ducts of the kidney. Insufficient numbers of water channels (aquaporins) reduce
water absorption, resulting in high volumes of very dilute urine.

Urine Volumes
Volume
condition
Volume
Causes
Normal
1–2 L/
day
Polyuria
>2.5 L/
day
Diabetes mellitus; diabetes insipidus; excess caffeine or alcohol; kidney disease;
certain drugs, such as diuretics; sickle cell anemia; excessive water intake
TABLE 25.2

Volume
condition
Volume
Causes
Oliguria
300–500
mL/day
Dehydration; blood loss; diarrhea; cardiogenic shock; kidney disease; enlarged prostate
Anuria
<50 mL/
day
Kidney failure; obstruction, such as kidney stone or tumor; enlarged prostate
TABLE 25.2

The pH (hydrogen ion concentration) of the urine can vary more than 1000-fold, from a normal low of 4.5 to a
maximum of 8.0. Diet can influence pH; meats lower the pH, whereas citrus fruits, vegetables, and dairy products
raise the pH. Chronically high or low pH can lead to disorders, such as the development of kidney stones or
osteomalacia.
Specific gravity is a measure of the quantity of solutes per unit volume of a solution and is traditionally easier to
measure than osmolarity. Urine will always have a specific gravity greater than pure water (water = 1.0) due to the
presence of solutes. Laboratories can now measure urine osmolarity directly, which is a more accurate indicator of
urinary solutes than specific gravity. Remember that osmolarity is the number of osmoles or milliosmoles per liter
of fluid (mOsmol/L). Urine osmolarity ranges from a low of 50–100 mOsmol/L to as high as 1200 mOsmol/L H2O.
Cells are not normally found in the urine. The presence of leukocytes may indicate a urinary tract infection.
Leukocyte esterase is released by leukocytes; if detected in the urine, it can be taken as indirect evidence of a
urinary tract infection (UTI).
Protein does not normally leave the glomerular capillaries, so only trace amounts of protein should be found in the
urine, approximately 10 mg/100 mL in a random sample. If excessive protein is detected in the urine, it usually
means that the glomerulus is damaged and is allowing protein to “leak” into the filtrate.
Ketones are byproducts of fat metabolism. Finding ketones in the urine suggests that the body is using fat as an
energy source in preference to glucose. In diabetes mellitus when there is not enough insulin (type I diabetes
mellitus) or because of insulin resistance (type II diabetes mellitus), there is plenty of glucose, but without the
action of insulin, the cells cannot take it up, so it remains in the bloodstream. Instead, the cells are forced to use fat
as their energy source, and fat consumed at such a level produces excessive ketones as byproducts. These excess
ketones will appear in the urine. Ketones may also appear if there is a severe deficiency of proteins or carbohydrates
in the diet.
Nitrates (NO3–) occur normally in the urine. Gram-negative bacteria metabolize nitrate into nitrite (NO2–), and its
presence in the urine is indirect evidence of infection.
There should be no blood found in the urine. It may sometimes appear in urine samples as a result of menstrual
contamination, but this is not an abnormal condition. Now that you understand what the normal characteristics of
urine are, the next section will introduce you to how you store and dispose of this waste product and how you make
it.
