6.2 Bone Classification
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Classify bones according to their shapes
•
Describe the function of each category of bones
The 206 bones that compose the adult skeleton are divided into five categories based on their shapes (Figure 6.6).
Their shapes and their functions are related such that each categorical shape of bone has a distinct function.

FIGURE 6.6
Classifications of Bones
Bones are classified according to their shape.
Long Bones
A long bone is one that is cylindrical in shape, being longer than it is wide. Keep in mind, however, that the term
describes the shape of a bone, not its size. Long bones are found in the arms (humerus, ulna, radius) and legs
(femur, tibia, fibula), as well as in the fingers (metacarpals, phalanges) and toes (metatarsals, phalanges). Long
bones function as levers; they move when muscles contract.
Short Bones
A short bone is one that is cube-like in shape, being approximately equal in length, width, and thickness. The only
short bones in the human skeleton are in the carpals of the wrists and the tarsals of the ankles. Short bones provide
stability and support as well as some limited motion.

Flat Bones
The term “flat bone” is somewhat of a misnomer because, although a flat bone is typically thin, it is also often
curved. Examples include the cranial (skull) bones, the scapulae (shoulder blades), the sternum (breastbone), and
the ribs. Flat bones serve as points of attachment for muscles and often protect internal organs.
Irregular Bones
An irregular bone is one that does not have any easily characterized shape and therefore does not fit any other
classification. These bones tend to have more complex shapes, like the vertebrae that support the spinal cord and
protect it from compressive forces. Many facial bones, particularly the ones containing sinuses, are classified as
irregular bones.
Sesamoid Bones
A sesamoid bone is a small, round bone that, as the name suggests, is shaped like a sesame seed. These bones
form in tendons (the sheaths of tissue that connect bones to muscles) where a great deal of pressure is generated in
a joint. The sesamoid bones protect tendons by helping them overcome compressive forces. Sesamoid bones vary in
number and placement from person to person but are typically found in tendons associated with the feet, hands,
and knees. The patellae (singular = patella) are the only sesamoid bones found in common with every person. Table
6.1 reviews bone classifications with their associated features, functions, and examples.
Bone Classifications
Bone
classification
Features
Function(s)
Examples
Long
Cylinder-like shape, longer
than it is wide
Leverage
Femur, tibia, fibula, metatarsals,
humerus, ulna, radius,
metacarpals, phalanges
Short
Cube-like shape,
approximately equal in
length, width, and thickness
Provide stability, support,
while allowing for some
motion
Carpals, tarsals
Flat
Thin and curved
Points of attachment for
muscles; protectors of
internal organs
Sternum, ribs, scapulae, cranial
bones
Irregular
Complex shape
Protect internal organs
Vertebrae, facial bones
Sesamoid
Small and round; embedded
in tendons
Protect tendons from
compressive forces
Patellae
TABLE 6.1