14.1 Sensory Perception
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe different types of sensory receptors
•
Describe the structures responsible for the special senses of taste, smell, hearing, balance, and vision
•
Distinguish how different tastes are transduced
•
Describe the means of mechanoreception for hearing and balance
•
List the supporting structures around the eye and describe the structure of the eyeball
•
Describe the processes of phototransduction
A major role of sensory receptors is to help us learn about the environment around us, or about the state of our
internal environment. Stimuli from varying sources, and of different types, are received and changed into the
electrochemical signals of the nervous system. This occurs when a stimulus changes the cell membrane potential of
a sensory neuron. The stimulus causes the sensory cell to produce an action potential that is relayed into the central
nervous system (CNS), where it is integrated with other sensory information—or sometimes higher cognitive
functions—to become a conscious perception of that stimulus. The central integration may then lead to a motor
response.
Describing sensory function with the term sensation or perception is a deliberate distinction. Sensation is the
activation of sensory receptor cells at the level of the stimulus. Perception is the central processing of sensory
stimuli into a meaningful pattern. Perception is dependent on sensation, but not all sensations are perceived.
Receptors are the cells or structures that detect sensations. A receptor cell is changed directly by a stimulus. A
transmembrane protein receptor is a protein in the cell membrane that mediates a physiological change in a neuron,
most often through the opening of ion channels or changes in the cell signaling processes. Transmembrane
receptors are activated by chemicals called ligands. For example, a molecule in food can serve as a ligand for taste
receptors. Other transmembrane proteins, which are not accurately called receptors, are sensitive to mechanical or
thermal changes. Physical changes in these proteins increase ion flow across the membrane, and can generate an
action potential or a graded potential in the sensory neurons.
Sensory Receptors
Stimuli in the environment activate specialized receptor cells in the peripheral nervous system. Different types of
stimuli are sensed by different types of receptor cells. Receptor cells can be classified into types on the basis of
three different criteria: cell type, position, and function. Receptors can be classified structurally on the basis of cell
type and their position in relation to stimuli they sense. They can also be classified functionally on the basis of the
transduction of stimuli, or how the mechanical stimulus, light, or chemical changed the cell membrane potential.
Structural Receptor Types
The cells that interpret information about the environment can be either (1) a neuron that has a free nerve ending,
with dendrites embedded in tissue that would receive a sensation; (2) a neuron that has an encapsulated ending in
which the sensory nerve endings are encapsulated in connective tissue that enhances their sensitivity; or (3) a
specialized receptor cell, which has distinct structural components that interpret a specific type of stimulus (Figure
14.2). The pain and temperature receptors in the dermis of the skin are examples of neurons that have free nerve
endings. Also located in the dermis of the skin are lamellated corpuscles, neurons with encapsulated nerve endings
that respond to pressure and touch. The cells in the retina that respond to light stimuli are an example of a
specialized receptor, a photoreceptor.
FIGURE 14.2
Receptor Classification by Cell Type
Receptor cell types can be classified on the basis of their structure. Sensory
neurons can have either (a) free nerve endings or (b) encapsulated endings. Photoreceptors in the eyes, such as rod cells, are examples of
(c) specialized receptor cells. These cells release neurotransmitters onto a bipolar cell, which then synapses with the optic nerve neurons.
Another way that receptors can be classified is based on their location relative to the stimuli. An exteroceptor is a
receptor that is located near a stimulus in the external environment, such as the somatosensory receptors that are
located in the skin. An interoceptor is one that interprets stimuli from internal organs and tissues, such as the
receptors that sense the increase in blood pressure in the aorta or carotid sinus. Finally, a proprioceptor is a
receptor located near a moving part of the body, such as a muscle, that interprets the positions of the tissues as
they move.
Functional Receptor Types
A third classification of receptors is by how the receptor transduces stimuli into membrane potential changes.
Stimuli are of three general types. Some stimuli are ions and macromolecules that affect transmembrane receptor
proteins when these chemicals diffuse across the cell membrane. Some stimuli are physical variations in the
environment that affect receptor cell membrane potentials. Other stimuli include the electromagnetic radiation from
visible light. For humans, the only electromagnetic energy that is perceived by our eyes is visible light. Some other
organisms have receptors that humans lack, such as the heat sensors of snakes, the ultraviolet light sensors of
bees, or magnetic receptors in migratory birds.
Receptor cells can be further categorized on the basis of the type of stimuli they transduce. Chemical stimuli can be
interpreted by a chemoreceptor that interprets chemical stimuli, such as an object’s taste or smell. Osmoreceptors
respond to solute concentrations of body fluids. Additionally, pain is primarily a chemical sense that interprets the
presence of chemicals from tissue damage, or similar intense stimuli, through a nociceptor. Physical stimuli, such
as pressure and vibration, as well as the sensation of sound and body position (balance), are interpreted through a
mechanoreceptor. Another physical stimulus that has its own type of receptor is temperature, which is sensed
through a thermoreceptor that is either sensitive to temperatures above (heat) or below (cold) normal body
temperature.
Sensory Modalities
Ask anyone what the senses are, and they are likely to list the five major senses—taste, smell, touch, hearing, and
sight. However, these are not all of the senses. The most obvious omission from this list is balance. Also, what is
referred to simply as touch can be further subdivided into pressure, vibration, stretch, and hair-follicle position, on
the basis of the type of mechanoreceptors that perceive these touch sensations. Other overlooked senses include
temperature perception by thermoreceptors and pain perception by nociceptors.
Within the realm of physiology, senses can be classified as either general or specific. A general sense is one that is
distributed throughout the body and has receptor cells within the structures of other organs. Mechanoreceptors in
the skin, muscles, or the walls of blood vessels are examples of this type. General senses often contribute to the
sense of touch, as described above, or to proprioception (body movement) and kinesthesia (body movement), or to
a visceral sense, which is most important to autonomic functions. A special sense is one that has a specific organ
devoted to it, namely the eye, inner ear, tongue, or nose.
Each of the senses is referred to as a sensory modality. Modality refers to the way that information is encoded,
which is similar to the idea of transduction. The main sensory modalities can be described on the basis of how each
is transduced. The chemical senses are taste and smell. The general sense that is usually referred to as touch
includes chemical sensation in the form of nociception, or pain. Pressure, vibration, muscle stretch, and the
movement of hair by an external stimulus, are all sensed by mechanoreceptors. Hearing and balance are also
sensed by mechanoreceptors. Finally, vision involves the activation of photoreceptors.
Listing all the different sensory modalities, which can number as many as 17, involves separating the five major
senses into more specific categories, or submodalities, of the larger sense. An individual sensory modality
represents the sensation of a specific type of stimulus. For example, the general sense of touch, which is known as
somatosensation, can be separated into light pressure, deep pressure, vibration, itch, pain, temperature, or hair
movement.
Gustation (Taste)
Only a few recognized submodalities exist within the sense of taste, or gustation. Until recently, only four tastes
were recognized: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. Research at the turn of the 20th century led to recognition of the fifth
taste, umami, during the mid-1980s. Umami is a Japanese word that means “delicious taste,” and is often
translated to mean savory. Very recent research has suggested that there may also be a sixth taste for fats, or lipids.
Gustation is the special sense associated with the tongue. The surface of the tongue, along with the rest of the oral
cavity, is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium. Raised bumps called papillae (singular = papilla) contain the
structures for gustatory transduction. There are four types of papillae, based on their appearance (Figure 14.3):
circumvallate, foliate, filiform, and fungiform. Within the structure of the papillae are taste buds that contain
specialized gustatory receptor cells for the transduction of taste stimuli. These receptor cells are sensitive to the
chemicals contained within foods that are ingested, and they release neurotransmitters based on the amount of the
chemical in the food. Neurotransmitters from the gustatory cells can activate sensory neurons in the facial,
glossopharyngeal, and vagus cranial nerves.

FIGURE 14.3
The Tongue
The tongue is covered with small bumps, called papillae, which contain taste buds that are sensitive to
chemicals in ingested food or drink. Different types of papillae are found in different regions of the tongue. The taste buds contain
specialized gustatory receptor cells that respond to chemical stimuli dissolved in the saliva. These receptor cells activate sensory neurons
that are part of the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves. LM × 1600. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
Salty taste is simply the perception of sodium ions (Na+) in the saliva. When you eat something salty, the salt
crystals dissociate into the component ions Na+ and Cl–, which dissolve into the saliva in your mouth. The Na+
concentration becomes high outside the gustatory cells, creating a strong concentration gradient that drives the
diffusion of the ion into the cells. The entry of Na+ into these cells results in the depolarization of the cell membrane
and the generation of a receptor potential.
Sour taste is the perception of H+ concentration. Just as with sodium ions in salty flavors, these hydrogen ions enter
the cell and trigger depolarization. Sour flavors are, essentially, the perception of acids in our food. Increasing
hydrogen ion concentrations in the saliva (lowering saliva pH) triggers progressively stronger graded potentials in
the gustatory cells. For example, orange juice—which contains citric acid—will taste sour because it has a pH value
of approximately 3. Of course, it is often sweetened so that the sour taste is masked.
The first two tastes (salty and sour) are triggered by the cations Na+ and H+. The other tastes result from food
molecules binding to a G protein–coupled receptor. A G protein signal transduction system ultimately leads to
depolarization of the gustatory cell. The sweet taste is the sensitivity of gustatory cells to the presence of glucose
dissolved in the saliva. Other monosaccharides such as fructose, or artificial sweeteners such as aspartame
(NutraSweet™), saccharine, or sucralose (Splenda™) also activate the sweet receptors. The affinity for each of these
molecules varies, and some will taste sweeter than glucose because they bind to the G protein–coupled receptor
differently.
Bitter taste is similar to sweet in that food molecules bind to G protein–coupled receptors. However, there are a
number of different ways in which this can happen because there are a large diversity of bitter-tasting molecules.
Some bitter molecules depolarize gustatory cells, whereas others hyperpolarize gustatory cells. Likewise, some
bitter molecules increase G protein activation within the gustatory cells, whereas other bitter molecules decrease G
protein activation. The specific response depends on which molecule is binding to the receptor.
One major group of bitter-tasting molecules are alkaloids. Alkaloids are nitrogen containing molecules that are
commonly found in bitter-tasting plant products, such as coffee, hops (in beer), tannins (in wine), tea, and aspirin.
By containing toxic alkaloids, the plant is less susceptible to microbe infection and less attractive to herbivores.
Therefore, the function of bitter taste may primarily be related to stimulating the gag reflex to avoid ingesting
poisons. Because of this, many bitter foods that are normally ingested are often combined with a sweet component
to make them more palatable (cream and sugar in coffee, for example). The highest concentration of bitter receptors
appear to be in the posterior tongue, where a gag reflex could still spit out poisonous food.
The taste known as umami is often referred to as the savory taste. Like sweet and bitter, it is based on the activation
of G protein–coupled receptors by a specific molecule. The molecule that activates this receptor is the amino acid L-
glutamate. Therefore, the umami flavor is often perceived while eating protein-rich foods. Not surprisingly, dishes
that contain meat are often described as savory.
Once the gustatory cells are activated by the taste molecules, they release neurotransmitters onto the dendrites of
sensory neurons. These neurons are part of the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves, as well as a component
within the vagus nerve dedicated to the gag reflex. The facial nerve connects to taste buds in the anterior third of the
tongue. The glossopharyngeal nerve connects to taste buds in the posterior two thirds of the tongue. The vagus
nerve connects to taste buds in the extreme posterior of the tongue, verging on the pharynx, which are more
sensitive to noxious stimuli such as bitterness.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/DanielleReed) to learn about Dr. Danielle Reed of the Monell Chemical
Senses Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, who became interested in science at an early age because of her
sensory experiences. She recognized that her sense of taste was unique compared with other people she knew.
Now, she studies the genetic differences between people and their sensitivities to taste stimuli. In the video, there is
a brief image of a person sticking out their tongue, which has been covered with a colored dye. This is how Dr. Reed
is able to visualize and count papillae on the surface of the tongue. People fall into two groups known as “tasters”
and “non-tasters” based on the density of papillae on their tongue, which also indicates the number of taste buds.
Non-tasters can taste food, but they are not as sensitive to certain tastes, such as bitterness. Dr. Reed discovered
that she is a non-taster, which explains why she perceived bitterness differently than other people she knew. Are
you very sensitive to tastes? Can you see any similarities among the members of your family?
Olfaction (Smell)
Like taste, the sense of smell, or olfaction, is also responsive to chemical stimuli. The olfactory receptor neurons are
located in a small region within the superior nasal cavity (Figure 14.4). This region is referred to as the olfactory
epithelium and contains bipolar sensory neurons. Each olfactory sensory neuron has dendrites that extend from
the apical surface of the epithelium into the mucus lining the cavity. As airborne molecules are inhaled through the
nose, they pass over the olfactory epithelial region and dissolve into the mucus. These odorant molecules bind to
proteins that keep them dissolved in the mucus and help transport them to the olfactory dendrites. The
odorant–protein complex binds to a receptor protein within the cell membrane of an olfactory dendrite. These
receptors are G protein–coupled, and will produce a graded membrane potential in the olfactory neurons.
The axon of an olfactory neuron extends from the basal surface of the epithelium, through an olfactory foramen in
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, and into the brain. The group of axons called the olfactory tract connect to
the olfactory bulb on the ventral surface of the frontal lobe. From there, the axons split to travel to several brain
regions. Some travel to the cerebrum, specifically to the primary olfactory cortex that is located in the inferior and
medial areas of the temporal lobe. Others project to structures within the limbic system and hypothalamus, where
smells become associated with long-term memory and emotional responses. This is how certain smells trigger
emotional memories, such as the smell of food associated with one’s birthplace. Smell is the one sensory modality
that does not synapse in the thalamus before connecting to the cerebral cortex. This intimate connection between
the olfactory system and the cerebral cortex is one reason why smell can be a potent trigger of memories and
emotion.

The nasal epithelium, including the olfactory cells, can be harmed by airborne toxic chemicals. Therefore, the
olfactory neurons are regularly replaced within the nasal epithelium, after which the axons of the new neurons must
find their appropriate connections in the olfactory bulb. These new axons grow along the axons that are already in
place in the cranial nerve.
FIGURE 14.4
The Olfactory System
(a) The olfactory system begins in the peripheral structures of the nasal cavity. (b) The olfactory
receptor neurons are within the olfactory epithelium. (c) Axons of the olfactory receptor neurons project through the cribriform plate of the
ethmoid bone and synapse with the neurons of the olfactory bulb (tissue source: simian). LM × 812. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Disorders of the...
Olfactory System: Anosmia
Blunt force trauma to the face, such as that common in many car accidents, can lead to the loss of the olfactory
nerve, and subsequently, loss of the sense of smell. This condition is known as anosmia. When the frontal lobe
of the brain moves relative to the ethmoid bone, the olfactory tract axons may be sheared apart. Professional
fighters often experience anosmia because of repeated trauma to face and head. In addition, certain
pharmaceuticals, such as antibiotics, can cause anosmia by killing all the olfactory neurons at once. If no axons
are in place within the olfactory nerve, then the axons from newly formed olfactory neurons have no guide to
lead them to their connections within the olfactory bulb. There are temporary causes of anosmia, as well, such
as those caused by inflammatory responses related to respiratory infections or allergies.
Loss of the sense of smell can result in food tasting bland. A person with an impaired sense of smell may require
additional spice and seasoning levels for food to be tasted. Anosmia may also be related to some presentations
of mild depression, because the loss of enjoyment of food may lead to a general sense of despair.
The ability of olfactory neurons to replace themselves decreases with age, leading to age-related anosmia. This
explains why some elderly people salt their food more than younger people do. However, this increased sodium
intake can increase blood volume and blood pressure, increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases in the
elderly.

Audition (Hearing)
Hearing, or audition, is the transduction of sound waves into a neural signal that is made possible by the structures
of the ear (Figure 14.5). The large, fleshy structure on the lateral aspect of the head is known as the auricle. Some
sources will also refer to this structure as the pinna, though that term is more appropriate for a structure that can be
moved, such as the external ear of a cat. The C-shaped curves of the auricle direct sound waves toward the auditory
canal. The canal enters the skull through the external auditory meatus of the temporal bone. At the end of the
auditory canal is the tympanic membrane, or ear drum, which vibrates after it is struck by sound waves. The auricle,
ear canal, and tympanic membrane are often referred to as the external ear. The middle ear consists of a space
spanned by three small bones called the ossicles. The three ossicles are the malleus, incus, and stapes, which are
Latin names that roughly translate to hammer, anvil, and stirrup. The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane
and articulates with the incus. The incus, in turn, articulates with the stapes. The stapes is then attached to the
inner ear, where the sound waves will be transduced into a neural signal. The middle ear is connected to the
pharynx through the Eustachian tube, which helps equilibrate air pressure across the tympanic membrane. The tube
is normally closed but will pop open when the muscles of the pharynx contract during swallowing or yawning.

FIGURE 14.5
Structures of the Ear
The external ear contains the auricle, ear canal, and tympanic membrane. The middle ear contains
the ossicles and is connected to the pharynx by the Eustachian tube. The inner ear contains the cochlea and vestibule, which are
responsible for audition and equilibrium, respectively.

The inner ear is often described as a bony labyrinth, as it is composed of a series of canals embedded within the
temporal bone. It has two separate regions, the cochlea and the vestibule, which are responsible for hearing and
balance, respectively. The neural signals from these two regions are relayed to the brain stem through separate fiber
bundles. However, these two distinct bundles travel together from the inner ear to the brain stem as the
vestibulocochlear nerve. Sound is transduced into neural signals within the cochlear region of the inner ear, which
contains the sensory neurons of the spiral ganglia. These ganglia are located within the spiral-shaped cochlea of
the inner ear. The cochlea is attached to the stapes through the oval window.
The oval window is located at the beginning of a fluid-filled tube within the cochlea called the scala vestibuli. The
scala vestibuli extends from the oval window, travelling above the cochlear duct, which is the central cavity of the
cochlea that contains the sound-transducing neurons. At the uppermost tip of the cochlea, the scala vestibuli curves
over the top of the cochlear duct. The fluid-filled tube, now called the scala tympani, returns to the base of the
cochlea, this time travelling under the cochlear duct. The scala tympani ends at the round window, which is
covered by a membrane that contains the fluid within the scala. As vibrations of the ossicles travel through the oval
window, the fluid of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani moves in a wave-like motion. The frequency of the fluid
waves match the frequencies of the sound waves (Figure 14.6). The membrane covering the round window will
bulge out or pucker in with the movement of the fluid within the scala tympani.

FIGURE 14.6
Transmission of Sound Waves to Cochlea
A sound wave causes the tympanic membrane to vibrate. This vibration is
amplified as it moves across the malleus, incus, and stapes. The amplified vibration is picked up by the oval window causing pressure
waves in the fluid of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani. The complexity of the pressure waves is determined by the changes in amplitude
and frequency of the sound waves entering the ear.
A cross-sectional view of the cochlea shows that the scala vestibuli and scala tympani run along both sides of the
cochlear duct (Figure 14.7). The cochlear duct contains several organs of Corti, which transduce the wave motion of
the two scala into neural signals. The organs of Corti lie on top of the basilar membrane, which is the side of the
cochlear duct located between the organs of Corti and the scala tympani. As the fluid waves move through the scala
vestibuli and scala tympani, the basilar membrane moves at a specific spot, depending on the frequency of the
waves. Higher frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is close to the base of the cochlea.
Lower frequency waves move the region of the basilar membrane that is near the tip of the cochlea.
FIGURE 14.7
Cross Section of the Cochlea
The three major spaces within the cochlea are highlighted. The scala tympani and scala
vestibuli lie on either side of the cochlear duct. The organ of Corti, containing the mechanoreceptor hair cells, is adjacent to the scala
tympani, where it sits atop the basilar membrane.
The organs of Corti contain hair cells, which are named for the hair-like stereocilia extending from the cell’s apical
surfaces (Figure 14.8). The stereocilia are an array of microvilli-like structures arranged from tallest to shortest.
Protein fibers tether adjacent hairs together within each array, such that the array will bend in response to
movements of the basilar membrane. The stereocilia extend up from the hair cells to the overlying tectorial
membrane, which is attached medially to the organ of Corti. When the pressure waves from the scala move the
basilar membrane, the tectorial membrane slides across the stereocilia. This bends the stereocilia either toward or
away from the tallest member of each array. When the stereocilia bend toward the tallest member of their array,
tension in the protein tethers opens ion channels in the hair cell membrane. This will depolarize the hair cell
membrane, triggering nerve impulses that travel down the afferent nerve fibers attached to the hair cells. When the
stereocilia bend toward the shortest member of their array, the tension on the tethers slackens and the ion channels
close. When no sound is present, and the stereocilia are standing straight, a small amount of tension still exists on
the tethers, keeping the membrane potential of the hair cell slightly depolarized.
FIGURE 14.8
Hair Cell
The hair cell is a mechanoreceptor with an array of stereocilia emerging from its apical surface. The stereocilia
are tethered together by proteins that open ion channels when the array is bent toward the tallest member of their array, and closed when
the array is bent toward the shortest member of their array.
FIGURE 14.9
Cochlea and Organ of Corti
LM × 412. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School ©
2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/cochleaMG) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. The basilar membrane is the thin membrane that extends from the central core of the cochlea to the edge.
What is anchored to this membrane so that they can be activated by movement of the fluids within the cochlea?
As stated above, a given region of the basilar membrane will only move if the incoming sound is at a specific
frequency. Because the tectorial membrane only moves where the basilar membrane moves, the hair cells in this
region will also only respond to sounds of this specific frequency. Therefore, as the frequency of a sound changes,
different hair cells are activated all along the basilar membrane. The cochlea encodes auditory stimuli for
frequencies between 20 and 20,000 Hz, which is the range of sound that human ears can detect. The unit of Hertz
measures the frequency of sound waves in terms of cycles produced per second. Frequencies as low as 20 Hz are
detected by hair cells at the apex, or tip, of the cochlea. Frequencies in the higher ranges of 20 KHz are encoded by
hair cells at the base of the cochlea, close to the round and oval windows (Figure 14.10). Most auditory stimuli
contain a mixture of sounds at a variety of frequencies and intensities (represented by the amplitude of the sound
wave). The hair cells along the length of the cochlear duct, which are each sensitive to a particular frequency, allow
the cochlea to separate auditory stimuli by frequency, just as a prism separates visible light into its component
colors.
FIGURE 14.10
Frequency Coding in the Cochlea
The standing sound wave generated in the cochlea by the movement of the oval
window deflects the basilar membrane on the basis of the frequency of sound. Therefore, hair cells at the base of the cochlea are activated
only by high frequencies, whereas those at the apex of the cochlea are activated only by low frequencies.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ear1) to learn more about how the structures of the ear convert sound waves
into a neural signal by moving the “hairs,” or stereocilia, of the cochlear duct. Specific locations along the length of
the duct encode specific frequencies, or pitches. The brain interprets the meaning of the sounds we hear as music,
speech, noise, etc. Which ear structures are responsible for the amplification and transfer of sound from the
external ear to the inner ear?
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/ear2) to learn more about the inner ear and to see the cochlea unroll,
with the base at the back of the image and the apex at the front. Specific wavelengths of sound cause specific
regions of the basilar membrane to vibrate, much like the keys of a piano produce sound at different frequencies.
Based on the animation, where do frequencies—from high to low pitches—cause activity in the hair cells within the
cochlear duct?

Equilibrium (Balance)
Along with audition, the inner ear is responsible for encoding information about equilibrium, the sense of balance. A
similar mechanoreceptor—a hair cell with stereocilia—senses head position, head movement, and whether our
bodies are in motion. These cells are located within the vestibule of the inner ear. Head position is sensed by the
utricle and saccule, whereas head movement is sensed by the semicircular canals. The neural signals generated in
the vestibular ganglion are transmitted through the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain stem and cerebellum.
The utricle and saccule are both largely composed of macula tissue (plural = maculae). The macula is composed of
hair cells surrounded by support cells. The stereocilia of the hair cells extend into a viscous gel called the otolithic
membrane (Figure 14.11). On top of the otolithic membrane is a layer of calcium carbonate crystals, called otoliths.
The otoliths essentially make the otolithic membrane top-heavy. The otolithic membrane moves separately from the
macula in response to head movements. Tilting the head causes the otolithic membrane to slide over the macula in
the direction of gravity. The moving otolithic membrane, in turn, bends the sterocilia, causing some hair cells to
depolarize as others hyperpolarize. The exact position of the head is interpreted by the brain based on the pattern of
hair-cell depolarization.
FIGURE 14.11
Linear Acceleration Coding by Maculae
The maculae are specialized for sensing linear acceleration, such as when
gravity acts on the tilting head, or if the head starts moving in a straight line. The difference in inertia between the hair cell stereocilia and
the otolithic membrane in which they are embedded leads to a shearing force that causes the stereocilia to bend in the direction of that
linear acceleration.
The semicircular canals are three ring-like extensions of the vestibule. One is oriented in the horizontal plane,
whereas the other two are oriented in the vertical plane. The anterior and posterior vertical canals are oriented at
approximately 45 degrees relative to the sagittal plane (Figure 14.12). The base of each semicircular canal, where it
meets with the vestibule, connects to an enlarged region known as the ampulla. The ampulla contains the hair cells
that respond to rotational movement, such as turning the head while saying “no.” The stereocilia of these hair cells
extend into the cupula, a membrane that attaches to the top of the ampulla. As the head rotates in a plane parallel
to the semicircular canal, the fluid lags, deflecting the cupula in the direction opposite to the head movement. The
semicircular canals contain several ampullae, with some oriented horizontally and others oriented vertically. By
comparing the relative movements of both the horizontal and vertical ampullae, the vestibular system can detect
the direction of most head movements within three-dimensional (3-D) space.

FIGURE 14.12
Rotational Coding by Semicircular Canals
Rotational movement of the head is encoded by the hair cells in the base of
the semicircular canals. As one of the canals moves in an arc with the head, the internal fluid moves in the opposite direction, causing the
cupula and stereocilia to bend. The movement of two canals within a plane results in information about the direction in which the head is
moving, and activation of all six canals can give a very precise indication of head movement in three dimensions.
Somatosensation (Touch)
Somatosensation is considered a general sense, as opposed to the special senses discussed in this section.
Somatosensation is the group of sensory modalities that are associated with touch, proprioception, and
interoception. These modalities include pressure, vibration, light touch, tickle, itch, temperature, pain,
proprioception, and kinesthesia. This means that its receptors are not associated with a specialized organ, but are
instead spread throughout the body in a variety of organs. Many of the somatosensory receptors are located in the
skin, but receptors are also found in muscles, tendons, joint capsules, ligaments, and in the walls of visceral organs.
Two types of somatosensory signals that are transduced by free nerve endings are pain and temperature. These two
modalities use thermoreceptors and nociceptors to transduce temperature and pain stimuli, respectively.
Temperature receptors are stimulated when local temperatures differ from body temperature. Some
thermoreceptors are sensitive to just cold and others to just heat. Nociception is the sensation of potentially
damaging stimuli. Mechanical, chemical, or thermal stimuli beyond a set threshold will elicit painful sensations.
Stressed or damaged tissues release chemicals that activate receptor proteins in the nociceptors. For example, the
sensation of heat associated with spicy foods involves capsaicin, the active molecule in hot peppers. Capsaicin
molecules bind to a transmembrane ion channel in nociceptors that is sensitive to temperatures above 37°C. The
dynamics of capsaicin binding with this transmembrane ion channel is unusual in that the molecule remains bound
for a long time. Because of this, it will decrease the ability of other stimuli to elicit pain sensations through the
activated nociceptor. For this reason, capsaicin can be used as a topical analgesic, such as in products such as Icy
Hot™.
If you drag your finger across a textured surface, the skin of your finger will vibrate. Such low frequency vibrations
are sensed by mechanoreceptors called Merkel cells, also known as type I cutaneous mechanoreceptors. Merkel
cells are located in the stratum basale of the epidermis. Deep pressure and vibration is transduced by lamellated
(Pacinian) corpuscles, which are receptors with encapsulated endings found deep in the dermis, or subcutaneous
tissue. Light touch is transduced by the encapsulated endings known as tactile (Meissner) corpuscles. Follicles are
also wrapped in a plexus of nerve endings known as the hair follicle plexus. These nerve endings detect the
movement of hair at the surface of the skin, such as when an insect may be walking along the skin. Stretching of the
skin is transduced by stretch receptors known as bulbous corpuscles. Bulbous corpuscles are also known as Ruffini
corpuscles, or type II cutaneous mechanoreceptors.
Other somatosensory receptors are found in the joints and muscles. Stretch receptors monitor the stretching of
tendons, muscles, and the components of joints. For example, have you ever stretched your muscles before or after
exercise and noticed that you can only stretch so far before your muscles spasm back to a less stretched state? This
spasm is a reflex that is initiated by stretch receptors to avoid muscle tearing. Such stretch receptors can also
prevent over-contraction of a muscle. In skeletal muscle tissue, these stretch receptors are called muscle spindles.
Golgi tendon organs similarly transduce the stretch levels of tendons. Bulbous corpuscles are also present in joint
capsules, where they measure stretch in the components of the skeletal system within the joint. The types of nerve
endings, their locations, and the stimuli they transduce are presented in Table 14.1.
Mechanoreceptors of Somatosensation
Name
Historical
(eponymous)
name
Location(s)
Stimuli
Free nerve
endings
*
Dermis, cornea, tongue, joint
capsules, visceral organs
Pain, temperature, mechanical
deformation
Mechanoreceptors
Merkel’s discs
Epidermal–dermal junction,
mucosal membranes
Low frequency vibration (5–15
Hz)
Bulbous corpuscle
Ruffini’s
corpuscle
Dermis, joint capsules
Stretch
Tactile corpuscle
Meissner’s
corpuscle
Papillary dermis, especially in
the fingertips and lips
Light touch, vibrations below 50
Hz
Lamellated
corpuscle
Pacinian
corpuscle
Deep dermis, subcutaneous
tissue
Deep pressure, high-frequency
vibration (around 250 Hz)
Hair follicle plexus
*
Wrapped around hair follicles in
the dermis
Movement of hair
Muscle spindle
*
In line with skeletal muscle
fibers
Muscle contraction and stretch
Tendon stretch
organ
Golgi tendon
organ
In line with tendons
Stretch of tendons
TABLE 14.1 *No corresponding eponymous name.
Vision
Vision is the special sense of sight that is based on the transduction of light stimuli received through the eyes. The
eyes are located within either orbit in the skull. The bony orbits surround the eyeballs, protecting them and
anchoring the soft tissues of the eye (Figure 14.13). The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, help to protect
the eye from abrasions by blocking particles that may land on the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each lid is
a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye (the
sclera), connecting the eyelids to the eyeball. Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland, located just inside the
orbit, superior and lateral to the eyeball. Tears produced by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the medial
corner of the eye, where the tears flow over the conjunctiva, washing away foreign particles.

FIGURE 14.13
The Eye in the Orbit
The eye is located within the orbit and surrounded by soft tissues that protect and support its
function. The orbit is surrounded by cranial bones of the skull.
Movement of the eye within the orbit is accomplished by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate
from the bones of the orbit and insert into the surface of the eyeball (Figure 14.14). Four of the muscles are
arranged at the cardinal points around the eye and are named for those locations. They are the superior rectus,
medial rectus, inferior rectus, and lateral rectus. When each of these muscles contract, the eye moves toward the
contracting muscle. For example, when the superior rectus contracts, the eye rotates to look up. The superior
oblique originates at the posterior orbit, near the origin of the four rectus muscles. However, the tendon of the
oblique muscles threads through a pulley-like piece of cartilage known as the trochlea. The tendon inserts obliquely
into the superior surface of the eye. The angle of the tendon through the trochlea means that contraction of the
superior oblique rotates the eye laterally. The inferior oblique muscle originates from the floor of the orbit and
inserts into the inferolateral surface of the eye. When it contracts, it laterally rotates the eye, in opposition to the
superior oblique. Rotation of the eye by the two oblique muscles is necessary because the eye is not perfectly
aligned on the sagittal plane. When the eye looks up or down, the eye must also rotate slightly to compensate for the
superior rectus pulling at approximately a 20-degree angle, rather than straight up. The same is true for the inferior
rectus, which is compensated by contraction of the inferior oblique. A seventh muscle in the orbit is the levator
palpebrae superioris, which is responsible for elevating and retracting the upper eyelid, a movement that usually
occurs in concert with elevation of the eye by the superior rectus (see Figure 14.13).
The extraocular muscles are innervated by three cranial nerves. The lateral rectus, which causes abduction of the
eye, is innervated by the abducens nerve. The superior oblique is innervated by the trochlear nerve. All of the other
muscles are innervated by the oculomotor nerve, as is the levator palpebrae superioris. The motor nuclei of these
cranial nerves connect to the brain stem, which coordinates eye movements.
FIGURE 14.14
Extraocular Muscles
The extraocular muscles move the eye within the orbit.
The eye itself is a hollow sphere composed of three layers of tissue. The outermost layer is the fibrous tunic, which
includes the white sclera and clear cornea. The sclera accounts for five sixths of the surface of the eye, most of
which is not visible, though humans are unique compared with many other species in having so much of the “white
of the eye” visible (Figure 14.15). The transparent cornea covers the anterior tip of the eye and allows light to enter
the eye. The middle layer of the eye is the vascular tunic, which is mostly composed of the choroid, ciliary body, and
iris. The choroid is a layer of highly vascularized connective tissue that provides a blood supply to the eyeball. The
choroid is posterior to the ciliary body, a muscular structure that is attached to the lens by suspensory ligaments,
or zonule fibers. These two structures bend the lens, allowing it to focus light on the back of the eye. Overlaying the
ciliary body, and visible in the anterior eye, is the iris—the colored part of the eye. The iris is a smooth muscle that
opens or closes the pupil, which is the hole at the center of the eye that allows light to enter. The iris constricts the
pupil in response to bright light and dilates the pupil in response to dim light. The innermost layer of the eye is the
neural tunic, or retina, which contains the nervous tissue responsible for photoreception.
The eye is also divided into two cavities: the anterior cavity and the posterior cavity. The anterior cavity is the space
between the cornea and lens, including the iris and ciliary body. It is filled with a watery fluid called the aqueous
humor. The posterior cavity is the space behind the lens that extends to the posterior side of the interior eyeball,
where the retina is located. The posterior cavity is filled with a more viscous fluid called the vitreous humor.
The retina is composed of several layers and contains specialized cells for the initial processing of visual stimuli. The
photoreceptors (rods and cones) change their membrane potential when stimulated by light energy. The change in
membrane potential alters the amount of neurotransmitter that the photoreceptor cells release onto bipolar cells in
the outer synaptic layer. It is the bipolar cell in the retina that connects a photoreceptor to a retinal ganglion cell
(RGC) in the inner synaptic layer. There, amacrine cells additionally contribute to retinal processing before an
action potential is produced by the RGC. The axons of RGCs, which lie at the innermost layer of the retina, collect at
the optic disc and leave the eye as the optic nerve (see Figure 14.15). Because these axons pass through the
retina, there are no photoreceptors at the very back of the eye, where the optic nerve begins. This creates a “blind
spot” in the retina, and a corresponding blind spot in our visual field.
FIGURE 14.15
Structure of the Eye
The sphere of the eye can be divided into anterior and posterior chambers. The wall of the eye is
composed of three layers: the fibrous tunic, vascular tunic, and neural tunic. Within the neural tunic is the retina, with three layers of cells
and two synaptic layers in between. The center of the retina has a small indentation known as the fovea.
Note that the photoreceptors in the retina (rods and cones) are located behind the axons, RGCs, bipolar cells, and
retinal blood vessels. A significant amount of light is absorbed by these structures before the light reaches the
photoreceptor cells. However, at the exact center of the retina is a small area known as the fovea. At the fovea, the
retina lacks the supporting cells and blood vessels, and only contains photoreceptors. Therefore, visual acuity, or
the sharpness of vision, is greatest at the fovea. This is because the fovea is where the least amount of incoming
light is absorbed by other retinal structures (see Figure 14.15). As one moves in either direction from this central
point of the retina, visual acuity drops significantly. In addition, each photoreceptor cell of the fovea is connected to
a single RGC. Therefore, this RGC does not have to integrate inputs from multiple photoreceptors, which reduces the
accuracy of visual transduction. Toward the edges of the retina, several photoreceptors converge on RGCs (through
the bipolar cells) up to a ratio of 50 to 1. The difference in visual acuity between the fovea and peripheral retina is
easily evidenced by looking directly at a word in the middle of this paragraph. The visual stimulus in the middle of
the field of view falls on the fovea and is in the sharpest focus. Without moving your eyes off that word, notice that
words at the beginning or end of the paragraph are not in focus. The images in your peripheral vision are focused by
the peripheral retina, and have vague, blurry edges and words that are not as clearly identified. As a result, a large
part of the neural function of the eyes is concerned with moving the eyes and head so that important visual stimuli
are centered on the fovea.
Light falling on the retina causes chemical changes to pigment molecules in the photoreceptors, ultimately leading
to a change in the activity of the RGCs. Photoreceptor cells have two parts, the inner segment and the outer
segment (Figure 14.16). The inner segment contains the nucleus and other common organelles of a cell, whereas
the outer segment is a specialized region in which photoreception takes place. There are two types of
photoreceptors—rods and cones—which differ in the shape of their outer segment. The rod-shaped outer segments
of the rod photoreceptor contain a stack of membrane-bound discs that contain the photosensitive pigment
rhodopsin. The cone-shaped outer segments of the cone photoreceptor contain their photosensitive pigments in
infoldings of the cell membrane. There are three cone photopigments, called opsins, which are each sensitive to a
particular wavelength of light. The wavelength of visible light determines its color. The pigments in human eyes are
specialized in perceiving three different primary colors: red, green, and blue.

FIGURE 14.16
Photoreceptor
(a) All photoreceptors have inner segments containing the nucleus and other important organelles and
outer segments with membrane arrays containing the photosensitive opsin molecules. Rod outer segments are long columnar shapes with
stacks of membrane-bound discs that contain the rhodopsin pigment. Cone outer segments are short, tapered shapes with folds of
membrane in place of the discs in the rods. (b) Tissue of the retina shows a dense layer of nuclei of the rods and cones. LM × 800.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
At the molecular level, visual stimuli cause changes in the photopigment molecule that lead to changes in
membrane potential of the photoreceptor cell. A single unit of light is called a photon, which is described in physics
as a packet of energy with properties of both a particle and a wave. The energy of a photon is represented by its
wavelength, with each wavelength of visible light corresponding to a particular color. Visible light is electromagnetic
radiation with a wavelength between 380 and 720 nm. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation longer than 720
nm fall into the infrared range, whereas wavelengths shorter than 380 nm fall into the ultraviolet range. Light with a
wavelength of 380 nm is blue whereas light with a wavelength of 720 nm is dark red. All other colors fall between
red and blue at various points along the wavelength scale.
Opsin pigments are actually transmembrane proteins that contain a cofactor known as retinal. Retinal is a
hydrocarbon molecule related to vitamin A. When a photon hits retinal, the long hydrocarbon chain of the molecule
is biochemically altered. Specifically, photons cause some of the double-bonded carbons within the chain to switch
from a cis to a trans conformation. This process is called photoisomerization. Before interacting with a photon,
retinal’s flexible double-bonded carbons are in the cis conformation. This molecule is referred to as 11-cis-retinal. A
photon interacting with the molecule causes the flexible double-bonded carbons to change to the trans-
conformation, forming all-trans-retinal, which has a straight hydrocarbon chain (Figure 14.17).
The shape change of retinal in the photoreceptors initiates visual transduction in the retina. Activation of retinal and
the opsin proteins result in activation of a G protein. The G protein changes the membrane potential of the
photoreceptor cell, which then releases less neurotransmitter into the outer synaptic layer of the retina. Until the
retinal molecule is changed back to the 11-cis-retinal shape, the opsin cannot respond to light energy, which is
called bleaching. When a large group of photopigments is bleached, the retina will send information as if opposing
visual information is being perceived. After a bright flash of light, afterimages are usually seen in negative. The
photoisomerization is reversed by a series of enzymatic changes so that the retinal responds to more light energy.
FIGURE 14.17
Retinal Isomers
The retinal molecule has two isomers, (a) one before a photon interacts with it and (b) one that is
altered through photoisomerization.
The opsins are sensitive to limited wavelengths of light. Rhodopsin, the photopigment in rods, is most sensitive to
light at a wavelength of 498 nm. The three color opsins have peak sensitivities of 564 nm, 534 nm, and 420 nm
corresponding roughly to the primary colors of red, green, and blue (Figure 14.18). The absorbance of rhodopsin in
the rods is much more sensitive than in the cone opsins; specifically, rods are sensitive to vision in low light
conditions, and cones are sensitive to brighter conditions. In normal sunlight, rhodopsin will be constantly bleached
while the cones are active. In a darkened room, there is not enough light to activate cone opsins, and vision is
entirely dependent on rods. Rods are so sensitive to light that a single photon can result in an action potential from a
rod’s corresponding RGC.

The three types of cone opsins, being sensitive to different wavelengths of light, provide us with color vision. By
comparing the activity of the three different cones, the brain can extract color information from visual stimuli. For
example, a bright blue light that has a wavelength of approximately 450 nm would activate the “red” cones
minimally, the “green” cones marginally, and the “blue” cones predominantly. The relative activation of the three
different cones is calculated by the brain, which perceives the color as blue. However, cones cannot react to low-
intensity light, and rods do not sense the color of light. Therefore, our low-light vision is—in essence—in grayscale. In
other words, in a dark room, everything appears as a shade of gray. If you think that you can see colors in the dark, it
is most likely because your brain knows what color something is and is relying on that memory.
FIGURE 14.18
Comparison of Color Sensitivity of Photopigments
Comparing the peak sensitivity and absorbance spectra of the four
photopigments suggests that they are most sensitive to particular wavelengths.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/occipital) to learn more about a transverse section through the brain that
depicts the visual pathway from the eye to the occipital cortex. The first half of the pathway is the projection from
the RGCs through the optic nerve to the lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus on either side. This first fiber in
the pathway synapses on a thalamic cell that then projects to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe where “seeing,”
or visual perception, takes place. This video gives an abbreviated overview of the visual system by concentrating on
the pathway from the eyes to the occipital lobe. The video makes the statement (at 0:45) that “specialized cells in
the retina called ganglion cells convert the light rays into electrical signals.” What aspect of retinal processing is
simplified by that statement? Explain your answer.
Sensory Nerves
Once any sensory cell transduces a stimulus into a nerve impulse, that impulse has to travel along axons to reach
the CNS. In many of the special senses, the axons leaving the sensory receptors have a topographical arrangement,
meaning that the location of the sensory receptor relates to the location of the axon in the nerve. For example, in the
retina, axons from RGCs in the fovea are located at the center of the optic nerve, where they are surrounded by
axons from the more peripheral RGCs.
Spinal Nerves
Generally, spinal nerves contain afferent axons from sensory receptors in the periphery, such as from the skin,
mixed with efferent axons travelling to the muscles or other effector organs. As the spinal nerve nears the spinal
cord, it splits into dorsal and ventral roots. The dorsal root contains only the axons of sensory neurons, whereas the
ventral roots contain only the axons of the motor neurons. Some of the branches will synapse with local neurons in
the dorsal root ganglion, posterior (dorsal) horn, or even the anterior (ventral) horn, at the level of the spinal cord
where they enter. Other branches will travel a short distance up or down the spine to interact with neurons at other
levels of the spinal cord. A branch may also turn into the posterior (dorsal) column of the white matter to connect
with the brain. For the sake of convenience, we will use the terms ventral and dorsal in reference to structures within
the spinal cord that are part of these pathways. This will help to underscore the relationships between the different
components. Typically, spinal nerve systems that connect to the brain are contralateral, in that the right side of the
body is connected to the left side of the brain and the left side of the body to the right side of the brain.
Cranial Nerves
Cranial nerves convey specific sensory information from the head and neck directly to the brain. Whereas spinal
information is contralateral, cranial nerve systems, with some exceptions, are mostly ipsilateral, meaning that a
cranial nerve on the right side of the head is connected to the right side of the brain. Some cranial nerves contain
only sensory axons, such as the olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves. Other cranial nerves contain both
sensory and motor axons, including the trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves (however, the vagus
nerve is not associated with the somatic nervous system). The general senses of somatosensation for the face travel
through the trigeminal system.
