14.2 Central Processing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the pathways that sensory systems follow into the central nervous system
•
Differentiate between the two major ascending pathways in the spinal cord
•
Describe the pathway of somatosensory input from the face and compare it to the ascending pathways in the
spinal cord
•
Explain topographical representations of sensory information in at least two systems
•
Describe two pathways of visual processing and the functions associated with each
Sensory Pathways
Specific regions of the CNS coordinate different somatic processes using sensory inputs and motor outputs of
peripheral nerves. A simple case is a reflex caused by a synapse between a dorsal sensory neuron axon and a motor
neuron in the ventral horn. More complex arrangements are possible to integrate peripheral sensory information
with higher processes. The important regions of the CNS that play a role in somatic processes can be separated into
the spinal cord brain stem, diencephalon, cerebral cortex, and subcortical structures.
Spinal Cord and Brain Stem
A sensory pathway that carries peripheral sensations to the brain is referred to as an ascending pathway, or
ascending tract. The various sensory modalities each follow specific pathways through the CNS. Tactile and other
somatosensory stimuli activate receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, and joints throughout the entire body.
However, the somatosensory pathways are divided into two separate systems on the basis of the location of the
receptor neurons. Somatosensory stimuli from below the neck pass along the sensory pathways of the spinal cord,
whereas somatosensory stimuli from the head and neck travel through the cranial nerves—specifically, the
trigeminal system.
The dorsal column system (sometimes referred to as the dorsal column–medial lemniscus) and the spinothalamic
tract are two major pathways that bring sensory information to the brain (Figure 14.19). The sensory pathways in
each of these systems are composed of three successive neurons.
The dorsal column system begins with the axon of a dorsal root ganglion neuron entering the dorsal root and joining
the dorsal column white matter in the spinal cord. As axons of this pathway enter the dorsal column, they take on a
positional arrangement so that axons from lower levels of the body position themselves medially, whereas axons
from upper levels of the body position themselves laterally. The dorsal column is separated into two component
tracts, the fasciculus gracilis that contains axons from the legs and lower body, and the fasciculus cuneatus that
contains axons from the upper body and arms.
The axons in the dorsal column terminate in the nuclei of the medulla, where each synapses with the second neuron
in their respective pathway. The nucleus gracilis is the target of fibers in the fasciculus gracilis, whereas the
nucleus cuneatus is the target of fibers in the fasciculus cuneatus. The second neuron in the system projects from
one of the two nuclei and then decussates, or crosses the midline of the medulla. These axons then continue to
ascend the brain stem as a bundle called the medial lemniscus. These axons terminate in the thalamus, where
each synapses with the third neuron in their respective pathway. The third neuron in the system projects its axons to
the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex, where somatosensory stimuli are initially processed and the conscious
perception of the stimulus occurs.
The spinothalamic tract also begins with neurons in a dorsal root ganglion. These neurons extend their axons to the
dorsal horn, where they synapse with the second neuron in their respective pathway. The name “spinothalamic”
comes from this second neuron, which has its cell body in the spinal cord gray matter and connects to the thalamus.
Axons from these second neurons then decussate within the spinal cord and ascend to the brain and enter the
thalamus, where each synapses with the third neuron in its respective pathway. The neurons in the thalamus then
project their axons to the spinothalamic tract, which synapses in the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex.
These two systems are similar in that they both begin with dorsal root ganglion cells, as with most general sensory
information. The dorsal column system is primarily responsible for touch sensations and proprioception, whereas
the spinothalamic tract pathway is primarily responsible for pain and temperature sensations. Another similarity is
that the second neurons in both of these pathways are contralateral, because they project across the midline to the
other side of the brain or spinal cord. In the dorsal column system, this decussation takes place in the brain stem; in
the spinothalamic pathway, it takes place in the spinal cord at the same spinal cord level at which the information
entered. The third neurons in the two pathways are essentially the same. In both, the second neuron synapses in
the thalamus, and the thalamic neuron projects to the somatosensory cortex.
FIGURE 14.19
Anterior View of Ascending Sensory Pathways of the Spinal Cord
The dorsal column system and spinothalamic tract
are the major ascending pathways that connect the periphery with the brain.

The trigeminal pathway carries somatosensory information from the face, head, mouth, and nasal cavity. As with the
previously discussed nerve tracts, the sensory pathways of the trigeminal pathway each involve three successive
neurons. First, axons from the trigeminal ganglion enter the brain stem at the level of the pons. These axons project
to one of three locations. The spinal trigeminal nucleus of the medulla receives information similar to that carried
by spinothalamic tract, such as pain and temperature sensations. Other axons go to either the chief sensory
nucleus in the pons or the mesencephalic nuclei in the midbrain. These nuclei receive information like that carried
by the dorsal column system, such as touch, pressure, vibration, and proprioception. Axons from the second neuron
decussate and ascend to the thalamus along the trigeminothalamic tract. In the thalamus, each axon synapses with
the third neuron in its respective pathway. Axons from the third neuron then project from the thalamus to the
primary somatosensory cortex of the cerebrum.
The sensory pathway for gustation travels along the facial and glossopharyngeal cranial nerves, which synapse with
neurons of the solitary nucleus in the brain stem. Axons from the solitary nucleus then project to the ventral
posterior nucleus of the thalamus. Finally, axons from the ventral posterior nucleus project to the gustatory cortex
of the cerebral cortex, where taste is processed and consciously perceived.
The sensory pathway for audition travels along the vestibulocochlear nerve, which synapses with neurons in the
cochlear nuclei of the superior medulla. Within the brain stem, input from either ear is combined to extract location
information from the auditory stimuli. Whereas the initial auditory stimuli received at the cochlea strictly represent
the frequency—or pitch—of the stimuli, the locations of sounds can be determined by comparing information arriving
at both ears.
Sound localization is a feature of central processing in the auditory nuclei of the brain stem. Sound localization is
achieved by the brain calculating the interaural time difference and the interaural intensity difference. A sound
originating from a specific location will arrive at each ear at different times, unless the sound is directly in front of
the listener. If the sound source is slightly to the left of the listener, the sound will arrive at the left ear microseconds
before it arrives at the right ear (Figure 14.20). This time difference is an example of an interaural time difference.
Also, the sound will be slightly louder in the left ear than in the right ear because some of the sound waves reaching
the opposite ear are blocked by the head. This is an example of an interaural intensity difference.

FIGURE 14.20
Auditory Brain Stem Mechanisms of Sound Localization
Localizing sound in the horizontal plane is achieved by
processing in the medullary nuclei of the auditory system. Connections between neurons on either side are able to compare very slight
differences in sound stimuli that arrive at either ear and represent interaural time and intensity differences.
Auditory processing continues on to a nucleus in the midbrain called the inferior colliculus. Axons from the inferior
colliculus project to two locations, the thalamus and the superior colliculus. The medial geniculate nucleus of the
thalamus receives the auditory information and then projects that information to the auditory cortex in the temporal
lobe of the cerebral cortex. The superior colliculus receives input from the visual and somatosensory systems, as
well as the ears, to initiate stimulation of the muscles that turn the head and neck toward the auditory stimulus.
Balance is coordinated through the vestibular system, the nerves of which are composed of axons from the
vestibular ganglion that carries information from the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals. The system
contributes to controlling head and neck movements in response to vestibular signals. An important function of the
vestibular system is coordinating eye and head movements to maintain visual attention. Most of the axons terminate
in the vestibular nuclei of the medulla. Some axons project from the vestibular ganglion directly to the cerebellum,
with no intervening synapse in the vestibular nuclei. The cerebellum is primarily responsible for initiating
movements on the basis of equilibrium information.
Neurons in the vestibular nuclei project their axons to targets in the brain stem. One target is the reticular formation,
which influences respiratory and cardiovascular functions in relation to body movements. A second target of the
axons of neurons in the vestibular nuclei is the spinal cord, which initiates the spinal reflexes involved with posture
and balance. To assist the visual system, fibers of the vestibular nuclei project to the oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducens nuclei to influence signals sent along the cranial nerves. These connections constitute the pathway of the
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), which compensates for head and body movement by stabilizing images on the retina
(Figure 14.21). Finally, the vestibular nuclei project to the thalamus to join the proprioceptive pathway of the dorsal
column system, allowing conscious perception of equilibrium.

FIGURE 14.21
Vestibulo-ocular Reflex
Connections between the vestibular system and the cranial nerves controlling eye movement
keep the eyes centered on a visual stimulus, even though the head is moving. During head movement, the eye muscles move the eyes in the
opposite direction as the head movement, keeping the visual stimulus centered in the field of view.
The connections of the optic nerve are more complicated than those of other cranial nerves. Instead of the
connections being between each eye and the brain, visual information is segregated between the left and right sides
of the visual field. In addition, some of the information from one side of the visual field projects to the opposite side
of the brain. Within each eye, the axons projecting from the medial side of the retina decussate at the optic chiasm.
For example, the axons from the medial retina of the left eye cross over to the right side of the brain at the optic
chiasm. However, within each eye, the axons projecting from the lateral side of the retina do not decussate. For
example, the axons from the lateral retina of the right eye project back to the right side of the brain. Therefore the
left field of view of each eye is processed on the right side of the brain, whereas the right field of view of each eye is
processed on the left side of the brain (Figure 14.22).

FIGURE 14.22
Segregation of Visual Field Information at the Optic Chiasm
Contralateral visual field information from the lateral
retina projects to the ipsilateral brain, whereas ipsilateral visual field information has to decussate at the optic chiasm to reach the opposite
side of the brain. (Note that this is an inferior view.)
A unique clinical presentation that relates to this anatomic arrangement is the loss of lateral peripheral vision,
known as bilateral hemianopia. This is different from “tunnel vision” because the superior and inferior peripheral
fields are not lost. Visual field deficits can be disturbing for a patient, but in this case, the cause is not within the
visual system itself. A growth of the pituitary gland presses against the optic chiasm and interferes with signal
transmission. However, the axons projecting to the same side of the brain are unaffected. Therefore, the patient
loses the outermost areas of their field of vision and cannot see objects to their right and left.
Extending from the optic chiasm, the axons of the visual system are referred to as the optic tract instead of the optic
nerve. The optic tract has three major targets, two in the diencephalon and one in the midbrain. The connection
between the eyes and diencephalon is demonstrated during development, in which the neural tissue of the retina
differentiates from that of the diencephalon by the growth of the secondary vesicles. The connections of the retina
into the CNS are a holdover from this developmental association. The majority of the connections of the optic tract
are to the thalamus—specifically, the lateral geniculate nucleus. Axons from this nucleus then project to the visual
cortex of the cerebrum, located in the occipital lobe. Another target of the optic tract is the superior colliculus.
In addition, a very small number of RGC axons project from the optic chiasm to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
hypothalamus. These RGCs are photosensitive, in that they respond to the presence or absence of light. Unlike the
photoreceptors, however, these photosensitive RGCs cannot be used to perceive images. By simply responding to
the absence or presence of light, these RGCs can send information about day length. The perceived proportion of
sunlight to darkness establishes the circadian rhythm of our bodies, allowing certain physiological events to occur
at approximately the same time every day.
Diencephalon
The diencephalon is beneath the cerebrum and includes the thalamus and hypothalamus. In the somatic nervous
system, the thalamus is an important relay for communication between the cerebrum and the rest of the nervous
system. The hypothalamus has both somatic and autonomic functions. In addition, the hypothalamus
communicates with the limbic system, which controls emotions and memory functions.
Sensory input to the thalamus comes from most of the special senses and ascending somatosensory tracts. Each
sensory system is relayed through a particular nucleus in the thalamus. The thalamus is a required transfer point for
most sensory tracts that reach the cerebral cortex, where conscious sensory perception begins. The one exception
to this rule is the olfactory system. The olfactory tract axons from the olfactory bulb project directly to the cerebral
cortex, along with the limbic system and hypothalamus.
The thalamus is a collection of several nuclei that can be categorized into three anatomical groups. White matter
running through the thalamus defines the three major regions of the thalamus, which are an anterior nucleus, a
medial nucleus, and a lateral group of nuclei. The anterior nucleus serves as a relay between the hypothalamus and
the emotion and memory-producing limbic system. The medial nuclei serve as a relay for information from the
limbic system and basal ganglia to the cerebral cortex. This allows memory creation during learning, but also
determines alertness. The special and somatic senses connect to the lateral nuclei, where their information is
relayed to the appropriate sensory cortex of the cerebrum.
Cortical Processing
As described earlier, many of the sensory axons are positioned in the same way as their corresponding receptor
cells in the body. This allows identification of the position of a stimulus on the basis of which receptor cells are
sending information. The cerebral cortex also maintains this sensory topography in the particular areas of the cortex
that correspond to the position of the receptor cells. The somatosensory cortex provides an example in which, in
essence, the locations of the somatosensory receptors in the body are mapped onto the somatosensory cortex. This
mapping is often depicted using a sensory homunculus (Figure 14.23).
The term homunculus comes from the Latin word for “little man” and refers to a map of the human body that is laid
across a portion of the cerebral cortex. In the somatosensory cortex, the external genitals, feet, and lower legs are
represented on the medial face of the gyrus within the longitudinal fissure. As the gyrus curves out of the fissure and
along the surface of the parietal lobe, the body map continues through the thighs, hips, trunk, shoulders, arms, and
hands. The head and face are just lateral to the fingers as the gyrus approaches the lateral sulcus. The
representation of the body in this topographical map is medial to lateral from the lower to upper body. It is a
continuation of the topographical arrangement seen in the dorsal column system, where axons from the lower body
are carried in the fasciculus gracilis, whereas axons from the upper body are carried in the fasciculus cuneatus. As
the dorsal column system continues into the medial lemniscus, these relationships are maintained. Also, the head
and neck axons running from the trigeminal nuclei to the thalamus run adjacent to the upper body fibers. The
connections through the thalamus maintain topography such that the anatomic information is preserved. Note that
this correspondence does not result in a perfectly miniature scale version of the body, but rather exaggerates the
more sensitive areas of the body, such as the fingers and lower face. Less sensitive areas of the body, such as the
shoulders and back, are mapped to smaller areas on the cortex.

FIGURE 14.23
The Sensory Homunculus
A cartoon representation of the sensory homunculus arranged adjacent to the cortical region
in which the processing takes place.
Likewise, the topographic relationship between the retina and the visual cortex is maintained throughout the visual
pathway. The visual field is projected onto the two retinae, as described above, with sorting at the optic chiasm. The
right peripheral visual field falls on the medial portion of the right retina and the lateral portion of the left retina. The
right medial retina then projects across the midline through the optic chiasm. This results in the right visual field
being processed in the left visual cortex. Likewise, the left visual field is processed in the right visual cortex (see
Figure 14.22). Though the chiasm is helping to sort right and left visual information, superior and inferior visual
information is maintained topographically in the visual pathway. Light from the superior visual field falls on the
inferior retina, and light from the inferior visual field falls on the superior retina. This topography is maintained such
that the superior region of the visual cortex processes the inferior visual field and vice versa. Therefore, the visual
field information is inverted and reversed as it enters the visual cortex—up is down, and left is right. However, the
cortex processes the visual information such that the final conscious perception of the visual field is correct. The
topographic relationship is evident in that information from the foveal region of the retina is processed in the center
of the primary visual cortex. Information from the peripheral regions of the retina are correspondingly processed
toward the edges of the visual cortex. Similar to the exaggerations in the sensory homunculus of the somatosensory
cortex, the foveal-processing area of the visual cortex is disproportionately larger than the areas processing
peripheral vision.
In an experiment performed in the 1960s, subjects wore prism glasses so that the visual field was inverted before
reaching the eye. On the first day of the experiment, subjects would duck when walking up to a table, thinking it was
suspended from the ceiling. However, after a few days of acclimation, the subjects behaved as if everything were
represented correctly. Therefore, the visual cortex is somewhat flexible in adapting to the information it receives
from our eyes (Figure 14.24).

FIGURE 14.24
Topographic Mapping of the Retina onto the Visual Cortex
The visual field projects onto the retina through the
lenses and falls on the retinae as an inverted, reversed image. The topography of this image is maintained as the visual information travels
through the visual pathway to the cortex.
The cortex has been described as having specific regions that are responsible for processing specific information;
there is the visual cortex, somatosensory cortex, gustatory cortex, etc. However, our experience of these senses is
not divided. Instead, we experience what can be referred to as a seamless percept. Our perceptions of the various
sensory modalities—though distinct in their content—are integrated by the brain so that we experience the world as
a continuous whole.
In the cerebral cortex, sensory processing begins at the primary sensory cortex, then proceeds to an association
area, and finally, into a multimodal integration area. For example, the visual pathway projects from the retinae
through the thalamus to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. This area is primarily in the medial wall within
the longitudinal fissure. Here, visual stimuli begin to be recognized as basic shapes. Edges of objects are recognized
and built into more complex shapes. Also, inputs from both eyes are compared to extract depth information.
Because of the overlapping field of view between the two eyes, the brain can begin to estimate the distance of
stimuli based on binocular depth cues.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/l_3-D1) to learn more about how the brain perceives 3-D motion. Similar to
how retinal disparity offers 3-D moviegoers a way to extract 3-D information from the two-dimensional visual field
projected onto the retina, the brain can extract information about movement in space by comparing what the two
eyes see. If movement of a visual stimulus is leftward in one eye and rightward in the opposite eye, the brain
interprets this as movement toward (or away) from the face along the midline. If both eyes see an object moving in
the same direction, but at different rates, what would that mean for spatial movement?
Everyday Connection
Depth Perception, 3-D Movies, and Optical Illusions
The visual field is projected onto the retinal surface, where photoreceptors transduce light energy into neural
signals for the brain to interpret. The retina is a two-dimensional surface, so it does not encode three-
dimensional information. However, we can perceive depth. How is that accomplished?
Two ways in which we can extract depth information from the two-dimensional retinal signal are based on
monocular cues and binocular cues, respectively. Monocular depth cues are those that are the result of
information within the two-dimensional visual field. One object that overlaps another object has to be in front.
Relative size differences are also a cue. For example, if a basketball appears larger than the basket, then the
basket must be further away. On the basis of experience, we can estimate how far away the basket is. Binocular
depth cues compare information represented in the two retinae because they do not see the visual field exactly
the same.
The centers of the two eyes are separated by a small distance, which is approximately 6 to 6.5 cm in most
people. Because of this offset, visual stimuli do not fall on exactly the same spot on both retinae unless we are
fixated directly on them and they fall on the fovea of each retina. All other objects in the visual field, either closer
or farther away than the fixated object, will fall on different spots on the retina. When vision is fixed on an object
in space, closer objects will fall on the lateral retina of each eye, and more distant objects will fall on the medial
retina of either eye (Figure 14.25). This is easily observed by holding a finger up in front of your face as you look
at a more distant object. You will see two images of your finger that represent the two disparate images that are
falling on either retina.
These depth cues, both monocular and binocular, can be exploited to make the brain think there are three
dimensions in two-dimensional information. This is the basis of 3-D movies. The projected image on the screen
is two dimensional, but it has disparate information embedded in it. The 3-D glasses that are available at the
theater filter the information so that only one eye sees one version of what is on the screen, and the other eye
sees the other version. If you take the glasses off, the image on the screen will have varying amounts of blur
because both eyes are seeing both layers of information, and the third dimension will not be evident. Some
optical illusions can take advantage of depth cues as well, though those are more often using monocular cues to
fool the brain into seeing different parts of the scene as being at different depths.
There are two main regions that surround the primary cortex that are usually referred to as areas V2 and V3 (the
primary visual cortex is area V1). These surrounding areas are the visual association cortex. The visual association
regions develop more complex visual perceptions by adding color and motion information. The information
processed in these areas is then sent to regions of the temporal and parietal lobes. Visual processing has two
separate streams of processing: one into the temporal lobe and one into the parietal lobe. These are the ventral and
dorsal streams, respectively (Figure 14.26). The ventral stream identifies visual stimuli and their significance.
Because the ventral stream uses temporal lobe structures, it begins to interact with the non-visual cortex and may
be important in visual stimuli becoming part of memories. The dorsal stream locates objects in space and helps in
guiding movements of the body in response to visual inputs. The dorsal stream enters the parietal lobe, where it
interacts with somatosensory cortical areas that are important for our perception of the body and its movements.
The dorsal stream can then influence frontal lobe activity where motor functions originate.
FIGURE 14.25
Retinal Disparity
Because of the interocular distance, which results in objects of different distances falling on
different spots of the two retinae, the brain can extract depth perception from the two-dimensional information of the visual field.

FIGURE 14.26
Ventral and Dorsal Visual Streams
From the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe, visual processing continues in
two streams—one into the temporal lobe and one into the parietal lobe.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The inability to recognize people by their faces is a troublesome problem. It can be caused by trauma, or it may be
inborn. Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/faces) to learn more about a person who lost the ability to recognize
faces as the result of an injury. She cannot recognize the faces of close family members or herself. What other
information can a person suffering from prosopagnosia use to figure out whom they are seeing?
Disorders of the...
Brain: Prosopagnosia
The failures of sensory perception can be unusual and debilitating. A particular sensory deficit that inhibits an
important social function of humans is prosopagnosia, or face blindness. The word comes from the Greek words
prosopa, that means “faces,” and agnosia, that means “not knowing.” Some people may feel that they cannot
recognize people easily by their faces. However, a person with prosopagnosia cannot recognize the most
recognizable people in their respective cultures. They would not recognize the face of a celebrity, an important
historical figure, or even a family member like their mother. They may not even recognize their own face.
Prosopagnosia can be caused by trauma to the brain, or it can be present from birth. The exact cause of
proposagnosia and the reason that it happens to some people is unclear. A study of the brains of people born
with the deficit found that a specific region of the brain, the anterior fusiform gyrus of the temporal lobe, is often
underdeveloped. This region of the brain is concerned with the recognition of visual stimuli and its possible
association with memories. Though the evidence is not yet definitive, this region is likely to be where facial
recognition occurs.
Though this can be a devastating condition, people who suffer from it can get by—often by using other cues to
recognize the people they see. Often, the sound of a person’s voice, or the presence of unique cues such as
distinct facial features (a mole, for example) or hair color can help the sufferer recognize a familiar person. In
the video on prosopagnosia provided in this section, a woman is shown having trouble recognizing celebrities,
family members, and herself. In some situations, she can use other cues to help her recognize faces.
