20.1 Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Compare and contrast the three tunics that make up the walls of most blood vessels
•
Distinguish between elastic arteries, muscular arteries, and arterioles on the basis of structure, location, and
function
•
Describe the basic structure of a capillary bed, from the supplying metarteriole to the venule into which it drains
•
Explain the structure and function of venous valves in the large veins of the extremities
Blood is carried through the body via blood vessels. An artery is a blood vessel that carries blood away from the
heart, where it branches into ever-smaller vessels. Eventually, the smallest arteries, vessels called arterioles,
further branch into tiny capillaries, where nutrients and wastes are exchanged, and then combine with other vessels
that exit capillaries to form venules, small blood vessels that carry blood to a vein, a larger blood vessel that returns
blood to the heart.
Arteries and veins transport blood in two distinct circuits: the systemic circuit and the pulmonary circuit (Figure
20.2). Systemic arteries provide blood rich in oxygen to the body’s tissues. The blood returned to the heart through
systemic veins has less oxygen, since much of the oxygen carried by the arteries has been delivered to the cells. In
contrast, in the pulmonary circuit, arteries carry blood low in oxygen exclusively to the lungs for gas exchange.
Pulmonary veins then return freshly oxygenated blood from the lungs to the heart to be pumped back out into
systemic circulation. Although arteries and veins differ structurally and functionally, they share certain features.
FIGURE 20.2
Cardiovascular Circulation
The pulmonary circuit moves blood from the right side of the heart to the lungs and back to
the heart. The systemic circuit moves blood from the left side of the heart to the head and body and returns it to the right side of the heart
to repeat the cycle. The arrows indicate the direction of blood flow, and the colors show the relative levels of oxygen concentration.
Shared Structures
Different types of blood vessels vary slightly in their structures, but they share the same general features. Arteries
and arterioles have thicker walls than veins and venules because they are closer to the heart and receive blood that
is surging at a far greater pressure (Figure 20.3). Each type of vessel has a lumen—a hollow passageway through
which blood flows. Arteries have smaller lumens than veins, a characteristic that helps to maintain the pressure of
blood moving through the system. Together, their thicker walls and smaller diameters give arterial lumens a more
rounded appearance in cross section than the lumens of veins.

FIGURE 20.3
Structure of Blood Vessels
(a) Arteries and (b) veins share the same general features, but the walls of arteries are much
thicker because of the higher pressure of the blood that flows through them. (c) A micrograph shows the relative differences in thickness.
LM × 160. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of the University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
By the time blood has passed through capillaries and entered venules, the pressure initially exerted upon it by heart
contractions has diminished. In other words, in comparison to arteries, venules and veins withstand a much lower
pressure from the blood that flows through them. Their walls are considerably thinner and their lumens are
correspondingly larger in diameter, allowing more blood to flow with less vessel resistance. In addition, many veins
of the body, particularly those of the limbs, contain valves that assist the unidirectional flow of blood toward the
heart. This is critical because blood flow becomes sluggish in the extremities, as a result of the lower pressure and
the effects of gravity.
The walls of arteries and veins are largely composed of living cells and their products (including collagenous and
elastic fibers); the cells require nourishment and produce waste. Since blood passes through the larger vessels
relatively quickly, there is limited opportunity for blood in the lumen of the vessel to provide nourishment to or
remove waste from the vessel’s cells. Further, the walls of the larger vessels are too thick for nutrients to diffuse
through to all of the cells. Larger arteries and veins contain small blood vessels within their walls known as the vasa
vasorum—literally “vessels of the vessel”—to provide them with this critical exchange. Since the pressure within
arteries is relatively high, the vasa vasorum must function in the outer layers of the vessel (see Figure 20.3) or the
pressure exerted by the blood passing through the vessel would collapse it, preventing any exchange from
occurring. The lower pressure within veins allows the vasa vasorum to be located closer to the lumen. The
restriction of the vasa vasorum to the outer layers of arteries is thought to be one reason that arterial diseases are
more common than venous diseases, since its location makes it more difficult to nourish the cells of the arteries and
remove waste products. There are also minute nerves within the walls of both types of vessels that control the
contraction and dilation of smooth muscle. These minute nerves are known as the nervi vasorum.
Both arteries and veins have the same three distinct tissue layers, called tunics (from the Latin term tunica), for the
garments first worn by ancient Romans; the term tunic is also used for some modern garments. From the most
interior layer to the outer, these tunics are the tunica intima, the tunica media, and the tunica externa (see Figure
20.3). Table 20.1 compares and contrasts the tunics of the arteries and veins.
Comparison of Tunics in Arteries and Veins
Arteries
Veins
General
appearance
Thick walls with small lumens
Generally appear rounded
Thin walls with large lumens
Generally appear flattened
Tunica
intima
Endothelium usually appears wavy due to constriction of
smooth muscle
Internal elastic membrane present in larger vessels
Endothelium appears smooth
Internal elastic membrane
absent
Tunica
media
Normally the thickest layer in arteries
Smooth muscle cells and elastic fibers predominate (the
proportions of these vary with distance from the heart)
External elastic membrane present in larger vessels
Normally thinner than the
tunica externa
Smooth muscle cells and
collagenous fibers predominate
Nervi vasorum and vasa
vasorum present
External elastic membrane
absent
Tunica
externa
Normally thinner than the tunica media in all but the largest
arteries
Collagenous and elastic fibers
Nervi vasorum and vasa vasorum present
Normally the thickest layer in
veins
Collagenous and smooth fibers
predominate
Some smooth muscle fibers
Nervi vasorum and vasa
vasorum present
TABLE 20.1
Tunica Intima
The tunica intima (also called the tunica interna) is composed of epithelial and connective tissue layers. Lining the
tunica intima is the specialized simple squamous epithelium called the endothelium, which is continuous
throughout the entire vascular system, including the lining of the chambers of the heart. Damage to this endothelial
lining and exposure of blood to the collagenous fibers beneath is one of the primary causes of clot formation. Until
recently, the endothelium was viewed simply as the boundary between the blood in the lumen and the walls of the
vessels. Recent studies, however, have shown that it is physiologically critical to such activities as helping to
regulate capillary exchange and altering blood flow. The endothelium releases local chemicals called endothelins
that can constrict the smooth muscle within the walls of the vessel to increase blood pressure. Uncompensated
overproduction of endothelins may contribute to hypertension (high blood pressure) and cardiovascular disease.
Next to the endothelium is the basement membrane, or basal lamina, that effectively binds the endothelium to the
connective tissue. The basement membrane provides strength while maintaining flexibility, and it is permeable,
allowing materials to pass through it. The thin outer layer of the tunica intima contains a small amount of areolar
connective tissue that consists primarily of elastic fibers to provide the vessel with additional flexibility; it also
contains some collagenous fibers to provide additional strength.
In larger arteries, there is also a thick, distinct layer of elastic fibers known as the internal elastic membrane (also
called the internal elastic lamina) at the boundary with the tunica media. Like the other components of the tunica
intima, the internal elastic membrane provides structure while allowing the vessel to stretch. It is permeated with
small openings that allow exchange of materials between the tunics. The internal elastic membrane is not apparent
in veins. In addition, many veins, particularly in the lower limbs, contain valves formed by sections of thickened
endothelium that are reinforced with connective tissue, extending into the lumen.
Under the microscope, the lumen and the entire tunica intima of a vein will appear smooth, whereas those of an
artery will normally appear wavy because of the partial constriction of the smooth muscle in the tunica media, the
next layer of blood vessel walls.
Tunica Media
The tunica media is the substantial middle layer of the vessel wall (see Figure 20.3). It is generally the thickest
layer in arteries, and it is much thicker in arteries than it is in veins. The tunica media consists of layers of smooth
muscle supported by connective tissue that is primarily made up of elastic fibers, most of which are arranged in
circular sheets. Toward the outer portion of the tunic, there are also layers of longitudinal muscle. Contraction and
relaxation of the circular muscles decrease and increase the diameter of the vessel lumen, respectively. Specifically
in arteries, vasoconstriction decreases blood flow as the smooth muscle in the walls of the tunica media contracts,
making the lumen narrower and increasing blood pressure. Similarly, vasodilation increases blood flow as the
smooth muscle relaxes, allowing the lumen to widen and blood pressure to drop. Both vasoconstriction and
vasodilation are regulated in part by small vascular nerves, known as nervi vasorum, or “nerves of the vessel,” that
run within the walls of blood vessels. These are generally all sympathetic fibers, although some trigger vasodilation
and others induce vasoconstriction, depending upon the nature of the neurotransmitter and receptors located on
the target cell. Parasympathetic stimulation does trigger vasodilation as well as erection during sexual arousal in the
external genitalia of both sexes. Nervous control over vessels tends to be more generalized than the specific
targeting of individual blood vessels. Local controls, discussed later, account for this phenomenon. (Seek additional
content for more information on these dynamic aspects of the autonomic nervous system.) Hormones and local
chemicals also control blood vessels. Together, these neural and chemical mechanisms reduce or increase blood
flow in response to changing body conditions, from exercise to hydration. Regulation of both blood flow and blood
pressure is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
The smooth muscle layers of the tunica media are supported by a framework of collagenous fibers that also binds
the tunica media to the inner and outer tunics. Along with the collagenous fibers are large numbers of elastic fibers
that appear as wavy lines in prepared slides. Separating the tunica media from the outer tunica externa in larger
arteries is the external elastic membrane (also called the external elastic lamina), which also appears wavy in
slides. This structure is not usually seen in smaller arteries, nor is it seen in veins.
Tunica Externa
The outer tunic, the tunica externa (also called the tunica adventitia), is a substantial sheath of connective tissue
composed primarily of collagenous fibers. Some bands of elastic fibers are found here as well. The tunica externa in
veins also contains groups of smooth muscle fibers. This is normally the thickest tunic in veins and may be thicker
than the tunica media in some larger arteries. The outer layers of the tunica externa are not distinct but rather blend
with the surrounding connective tissue outside the vessel, helping to hold the vessel in relative position. If you are
able to palpate some of the superficial veins on your upper limbs and try to move them, you will find that the tunica
externa prevents this. If the tunica externa did not hold the vessel in place, any movement would likely result in
disruption of blood flow.
Arteries
An artery is a blood vessel that conducts blood away from the heart. All arteries have relatively thick walls that can
withstand the high pressure of blood ejected from the heart. However, those close to the heart have the thickest
walls, containing a high percentage of elastic fibers in all three of their tunics. This type of artery is known as an
elastic artery (Figure 20.4). Vessels larger than 10 mm in diameter are typically elastic. Their abundant elastic
fibers allow them to expand, as blood pumped from the ventricles passes through them, and then to recoil after the
surge has passed. If artery walls were rigid and unable to expand and recoil, their resistance to blood flow would
greatly increase and blood pressure would rise to even higher levels, which would in turn require the heart to pump
harder to increase the volume of blood expelled by each pump (the stroke volume) and maintain adequate pressure
and flow. Artery walls would have to become even thicker in response to this increased pressure. The elastic recoil
of the vascular wall helps to maintain the pressure gradient that drives the blood through the arterial system. An
elastic artery is also known as a conducting artery, because the large diameter of the lumen enables it to accept a
large volume of blood from the heart and conduct it to smaller branches.
FIGURE 20.4
Types of Arteries and Arterioles
Comparison of the walls of an elastic artery, a muscular artery, and an arteriole is
shown. In terms of scale, the diameter of an arteriole is measured in micrometers compared to millimeters for elastic and muscular
arteries.
Farther from the heart, where the surge of blood has dampened, the percentage of elastic fibers in an artery’s tunica
intima decreases and the amount of smooth muscle in its tunica media increases. The artery at this point is
described as a muscular artery. The diameter of muscular arteries typically ranges from 0.1 mm to 10 mm. Their
thick tunica media allows muscular arteries to play a leading role in vasoconstriction. In contrast, their decreased
quantity of elastic fibers limits their ability to expand. Fortunately, because the blood pressure has eased by the
time it reaches these more distant vessels, elasticity has become less important.
Notice that although the distinctions between elastic and muscular arteries are important, there is no “line of
demarcation” where an elastic artery suddenly becomes muscular. Rather, there is a gradual transition as the
vascular tree repeatedly branches. In turn, muscular arteries branch to distribute blood to the vast network of
arterioles. For this reason, a muscular artery is also known as a distributing artery.
Arterioles
An arteriole is a very small artery that leads to a capillary. Arterioles have the same three tunics as the larger
vessels, but the thickness of each is greatly diminished. The critical endothelial lining of the tunica intima is intact.
The tunica media is restricted to one or two smooth muscle cell layers in thickness. The tunica externa remains but
is very thin (see Figure 20.4).
With a lumen averaging 30 micrometers or less in diameter, arterioles are critical in slowing down—or
resisting—blood flow and, thus, causing a substantial drop in blood pressure. Because of this, you may see them
referred to as resistance vessels. The muscle fibers in arterioles are normally slightly contracted, causing arterioles
to maintain a consistent muscle tone—in this case referred to as vascular tone—in a similar manner to the muscular
tone of skeletal muscle. In reality, all blood vessels exhibit vascular tone due to the partial contraction of smooth
muscle. The importance of the arterioles is that they will be the primary site of both resistance and regulation of
blood pressure. The precise diameter of the lumen of an arteriole at any given moment is determined by neural and
chemical controls, and vasoconstriction and vasodilation in the arterioles are the primary mechanisms for
distribution of blood flow.
Capillaries
A capillary is a microscopic channel that supplies blood to the tissues, a process called perfusion. Exchange of
gases and other substances occurs between the blood in capillaries and the surrounding cells and their tissue fluid
(interstitial fluid). The diameter of a capillary lumen ranges from 5–10 micrometers; the smallest are just barely
wide enough for an erythrocyte to squeeze through. Flow through capillaries is often described as microcirculation.
The wall of a capillary consists of the endothelial layer surrounded by a basement membrane with occasional
smooth muscle fibers. There is some variation in wall structure: In a large capillary, several endothelial cells
bordering each other may line the lumen; in a small capillary, there may be only a single cell layer that wraps around
to contact itself.
For capillaries to function, their walls must be leaky, allowing substances to pass through. There are three major
types of capillaries, which differ according to their degree of “leakiness:” continuous, fenestrated, and sinusoid
capillaries (Figure 20.5).
Continuous Capillaries
The most common type of capillary, the continuous capillary, is found in almost all vascularized tissues. Continuous
capillaries are characterized by a complete endothelial lining with tight junctions between endothelial cells.
Although a tight junction is usually impermeable and only allows for the passage of water and ions, they are often
incomplete in capillaries, leaving intercellular clefts that allow for exchange of water and other very small molecules
between the blood plasma and the interstitial fluid. Substances that can pass between cells include metabolic
products, such as glucose, water, and small hydrophobic molecules like gases and hormones, as well as various
leukocytes. Continuous capillaries not associated with the brain are rich in transport vesicles, contributing to either
endocytosis or exocytosis. Those in the brain are part of the blood-brain barrier. Here, there are tight junctions and
no intercellular clefts, plus a thick basement membrane and astrocyte extensions called end feet; these structures
combine to prevent the movement of nearly all substances.
FIGURE 20.5
Types of Capillaries
The three major types of capillaries: continuous, fenestrated, and sinusoid.
Fenestrated Capillaries
A fenestrated capillary is one that has pores (or fenestrations) in addition to tight junctions in the endothelial lining.
These make the capillary permeable to larger molecules. The number of fenestrations and their degree of
permeability vary, however, according to their location. Fenestrated capillaries are common in the small intestine,
which is the primary site of nutrient absorption, as well as in the kidneys, which filter the blood. They are also found
in the choroid plexus of the brain and many endocrine structures, including the hypothalamus, pituitary, pineal, and
thyroid glands.
Sinusoid Capillaries
A sinusoid capillary (or sinusoid) is the least common type of capillary. Sinusoid capillaries are flattened, and they
have extensive intercellular gaps and incomplete basement membranes, in addition to intercellular clefts and
fenestrations. This gives them an appearance not unlike Swiss cheese. These very large openings allow for the
passage of the largest molecules, including plasma proteins and even cells. Blood flow through sinusoids is very
slow, allowing more time for exchange of gases, nutrients, and wastes. Sinusoids are found in the liver and spleen,
bone marrow, lymph nodes (where they carry lymph, not blood), and many endocrine glands including the pituitary
and adrenal glands. Without these specialized capillaries, these organs would not be able to provide their myriad of
functions. For example, when bone marrow forms new blood cells, the cells must enter the blood supply and can
only do so through the large openings of a sinusoid capillary; they cannot pass through the small openings of
continuous or fenestrated capillaries. The liver also requires extensive specialized sinusoid capillaries in order to
process the materials brought to it by the hepatic portal vein from both the digestive tract and spleen, and to release
plasma proteins into circulation.

Metarterioles and Capillary Beds
A metarteriole is a type of vessel that has structural characteristics of both an arteriole and a capillary. Slightly
larger than the typical capillary, the smooth muscle of the tunica media of the metarteriole is not continuous but
forms rings of smooth muscle (sphincters) prior to the entrance to the capillaries. Each metarteriole arises from a
terminal arteriole and branches to supply blood to a capillary bed that may consist of 10–100 capillaries.
The precapillary sphincters, circular smooth muscle cells that surround the capillary at its origin with the
metarteriole, tightly regulate the flow of blood from a metarteriole to the capillaries it supplies. Their function is
critical: If all of the capillary beds in the body were to open simultaneously, they would collectively hold every drop
of blood in the body and there would be none in the arteries, arterioles, venules, veins, or the heart itself. Normally,
the precapillary sphincters are closed. When the surrounding tissues need oxygen and have excess waste products,
the precapillary sphincters open, allowing blood to flow through and exchange to occur before closing once more
(Figure 20.6). If all of the precapillary sphincters in a capillary bed are closed, blood will flow from the metarteriole
directly into a thoroughfare channel and then into the venous circulation, bypassing the capillary bed entirely. This
creates what is known as a vascular shunt. In addition, an arteriovenous anastomosis may bypass the capillary
bed and lead directly to the venous system.
Although you might expect blood flow through a capillary bed to be smooth, in reality, it moves with an irregular,
pulsating flow. This pattern is called vasomotion and is regulated by chemical signals that are triggered in response
to changes in internal conditions, such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen ion, and lactic acid levels. For example,
during strenuous exercise when oxygen levels decrease and carbon dioxide, hydrogen ion, and lactic acid levels all
increase, the capillary beds in skeletal muscle are open, as they would be in the digestive system when nutrients are
present in the digestive tract. During sleep or rest periods, vessels in both areas are largely closed; they open only
occasionally to allow oxygen and nutrient supplies to travel to the tissues to maintain basic life processes.
FIGURE 20.6
Capillary Bed
In a capillary bed, arterioles give rise to metarterioles. Precapillary sphincters located at the junction of a
metarteriole with a capillary regulate blood flow. A thoroughfare channel connects the metarteriole to a venule. An arteriovenous
anastomosis, which directly connects the arteriole with the venule, is shown at the bottom.
Venules
A venule is an extremely small vein, generally 8–100 micrometers in diameter. Postcapillary venules join multiple
capillaries exiting from a capillary bed. Multiple venules join to form veins. The walls of venules consist of
endothelium, a thin middle layer with a few muscle cells and elastic fibers, plus an outer layer of connective tissue
fibers that constitute a very thin tunica externa (Figure 20.7). Venules as well as capillaries are the primary sites of
emigration or diapedesis, in which the white blood cells adhere to the endothelial lining of the vessels and then
squeeze through adjacent cells to enter the tissue fluid.

Veins
A vein is a blood vessel that conducts blood toward the heart. Compared to arteries, veins are thin-walled vessels
with large and irregular lumens (see Figure 20.7). Because they are low-pressure vessels, larger veins are commonly
equipped with valves that promote the unidirectional flow of blood toward the heart and prevent backflow toward
the capillaries caused by the inherent low blood pressure in veins as well as the pull of gravity. Table 20.2 compares
the features of arteries and veins.
FIGURE 20.7
Comparison of Veins and Venules
Many veins have valves to prevent back flow of blood, whereas venules do not. In
terms of scale, the diameter of a venule is measured in micrometers compared to millimeters for veins.
Comparison of Arteries and Veins
Arteries
Veins
Direction of blood flow
Conducts blood away from
the heart
Conducts blood toward the heart
General appearance
Rounded
Irregular, often collapsed
Pressure
High
Low
TABLE 20.2
20.1 • Structure and Function of Blood Vessels
817
Arteries
Veins
Wall thickness
Thick
Thin
Relative oxygen
concentration
Higher in systemic arteries
Lower in pulmonary arteries
Lower in systemic veins
Higher in pulmonary veins
Valves
Not present
Present most commonly in limbs and in veins
inferior to the heart
TABLE 20.2

Disorders of the...
Cardiovascular System: Edema and Varicose Veins
Despite the presence of valves and the contributions of other anatomical and physiological adaptations we will
cover shortly, over the course of a day, some blood will inevitably pool, especially in the lower limbs, due to the
pull of gravity. Any blood that accumulates in a vein will increase the pressure within it, which can then be
reflected back into the smaller veins, venules, and eventually even the capillaries. Increased pressure will
promote the flow of fluids out of the capillaries and into the interstitial fluid. The presence of excess tissue fluid
around the cells leads to a condition called edema.
Most people experience a daily accumulation of tissue fluid, especially if they spend much of their work life on
their feet (like most health professionals). However, clinical edema goes beyond normal swelling and requires
medical treatment. Edema has many potential causes, including hypertension and heart failure, severe protein
deficiency, renal failure, and many others. In order to treat edema, which is a sign rather than a discrete
disorder, the underlying cause must be diagnosed and alleviated.
Edema may be accompanied by varicose veins, especially in the superficial veins of the legs (Figure 20.8). This
disorder arises when defective valves allow blood to accumulate within the veins, causing them to distend, twist,
and become visible on the surface of the integument. Varicose veins may occur in all people, but are more
common in females and are often related to pregnancy. More than simple cosmetic blemishes, varicose veins
are often painful and sometimes itchy or throbbing. Without treatment, they tend to grow worse over time. The
use of support hose, as well as elevating the feet and legs whenever possible, may be helpful in alleviating this
condition. Laser surgery and interventional radiologic procedures can reduce the size and severity of varicose
veins. Severe cases may require conventional surgery to remove the damaged vessels. As there are typically
redundant circulation patterns, that is, anastomoses, for the smaller and more superficial veins, removal does
not typically impair the circulation. There is evidence that patients with varicose veins suffer a greater risk of
developing a thrombus or clot.

FIGURE 20.8
Varicose Veins
Varicose veins are commonly found in the lower limbs. (credit: Thomas Kriese)

Veins as Blood Reservoirs
In addition to their primary function of returning blood to the heart, veins may be considered blood reservoirs, since
systemic veins contain approximately 64 percent of the blood volume at any given time (Figure 20.9). Their ability to
hold this much blood is due to their high capacitance, that is, their capacity to distend (expand) readily to store a
high volume of blood, even at a low pressure. The large lumens and relatively thin walls of veins make them far more
distensible than arteries; thus, they are said to be capacitance vessels.

FIGURE 20.9
Distribution of Blood Flow

When blood flow needs to be redistributed to other portions of the body, the vasomotor center located in the
medulla oblongata sends sympathetic stimulation to the smooth muscles in the walls of the veins, causing
constriction—or in this case, venoconstriction. Less dramatic than the vasoconstriction seen in smaller arteries and
arterioles, venoconstriction may be likened to a “stiffening” of the vessel wall. This increases pressure on the blood
within the veins, speeding its return to the heart. As you will note in Figure 20.9, approximately 21 percent of the
venous blood is located in venous networks within the liver, bone marrow, and integument. This volume of blood is
referred to as venous reserve. Through venoconstriction, this “reserve” volume of blood can get back to the heart
more quickly for redistribution to other parts of the circulation.

CAREER CONNECTION
Vascular Surgeons and Technicians
Vascular surgery is a specialty in which the physician deals primarily with diseases of the vascular portion of the
cardiovascular system. This includes repair and replacement of diseased or damaged vessels, removal of plaque
from vessels, minimally invasive procedures including the insertion of venous catheters, and traditional surgery.
Following completion of medical school, the physician generally completes a 5-year surgical residency followed by
an additional 1 to 2 years of vascular specialty training. In the United States, most vascular surgeons are members
of the Society of Vascular Surgery.
Vascular technicians are specialists in imaging technologies that provide information on the health of the vascular
system. They may also assist physicians in treating disorders involving the arteries and veins. This profession often
overlaps with cardiovascular technology, which would also include treatments involving the heart. Although
recognized by the American Medical Association, there are currently no licensing requirements for vascular
technicians, and licensing is voluntary. Vascular technicians typically have an Associate’s degree or certificate,
involving 18 months to 2 years of training. The United States Bureau of Labor projects this profession to grow by 29
percent from 2010 to 2020.


Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/vascsurgery) to learn more about vascular surgery.
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this site (http://openstax.org/l/vasctechs) to learn more about vascular technicians.
