6.5 Fractures: Bone Repair
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Differentiate among the different types of fractures
•
Describe the steps involved in bone repair
A fracture is a broken bone. It will heal whether or not a physician resets it in its anatomical position. If the bone is
not reset correctly, the healing process will keep the bone in its deformed position.
When a broken bone is manipulated and set into its natural position without surgery, the procedure is called a
closed reduction. Open reduction requires surgery to expose the fracture and reset the bone. While some fractures
can be minor, others are quite severe and result in grave complications. For example, a fractured diaphysis of the
femur has the potential to release fat globules into the bloodstream. These can become lodged in the capillary beds
of the lungs, leading to respiratory distress and if not treated quickly, death.

Types of Fractures
Fractures are classified by their complexity, location, and other features (Figure 6.20). Table 6.4 outlines common
types of fractures. Some fractures may be described using more than one term because it may have the features of
more than one type (e.g., an open transverse fracture).


FIGURE 6.20
Types of Fractures
Compare healthy bone with different types of fractures: (a) closed fracture, (b) open fracture, (c)
transverse fracture, (d) spiral fracture, (e) comminuted fracture, (f) impacted fracture, (g) greenstick fracture, and (h) oblique fracture.

Types of Fractures
Type of fracture
Description
Transverse
Occurs straight across the long axis of the bone
Oblique
Occurs at an angle that is not 90 degrees
Spiral
Bone segments are pulled apart as a result of a twisting motion
Comminuted
Several breaks result in many small pieces between two large segments
Impacted
One fragment is driven into the other, usually as a result of compression
Greenstick
A partial fracture in which only one side of the bone is broken
Open (or
compound)
A fracture in which at least one end of the broken bone tears through the skin; carries a high
risk of infection
Closed (or
simple)
A fracture in which the skin remains intact
TABLE 6.4
Bone Repair
When a bone breaks, blood flows from any vessel torn by the fracture. These vessels could be in the periosteum,
osteons, and/or medullary cavity. The blood begins to clot, and about six to eight hours after the fracture, the
clotting blood has formed a fracture hematoma (Figure 6.21a). The disruption of blood flow to the bone results in
the death of bone cells around the fracture.
FIGURE 6.21
Stages in Fracture Repair
The healing of a bone fracture follows a series of progressive steps: (a) A fracture hematoma
forms. (b) Internal and external calli form. (c) Cartilage of the calli is replaced by trabecular bone. (d) Remodeling occurs.
Within about 48 hours after the fracture, chondrocytes from the endosteum have created an internal callus (plural
= calli) by secreting a fibrocartilaginous matrix between the two ends of the broken bone, while the periosteal
chondrocytes and osteoblasts create an external callus of hyaline cartilage and bone, respectively, around the
outside of the break (Figure 6.21b). This stabilizes the fracture.
Over the next several weeks, osteoclasts resorb the dead bone; osteogenic cells become active, divide, and
differentiate into osteoblasts. The cartilage in the calli is replaced by trabecular bone via endochondral ossification
(Figure 6.21c).
Eventually, the internal and external calli unite, compact bone replaces spongy bone at the outer margins of the
fracture, and healing is complete. A slight swelling may remain on the outer surface of the bone, but quite often, that
region undergoes remodeling (Figure 6.21d), and no external evidence of the fracture remains.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/fracturequiz) to review different types of fractures and then take a short
self-assessment quiz.