3.2 The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the structure and function of the cellular organelles associated with the endomembrane system,
including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes
•
Describe the structure and function of mitochondria and peroxisomes
•
Explain the three components of the cytoskeleton, including their composition and functions
Now that you have learned that the cell membrane surrounds all cells, you can dive inside of a prototypical human
cell to learn about its internal components and their functions. All living cells in multicellular organisms contain an
internal cytoplasmic compartment, and a nucleus within the cytoplasm. Cytosol, the jelly-like substance within the
cell, provides the fluid medium necessary for biochemical reactions. Eukaryotic cells, including all animal cells, also
contain various cellular organelles. An organelle (“little organ”) is one of several different types of membrane-
enclosed bodies in the cell, each performing a unique function. Just as the various bodily organs work together in
harmony to perform all of a human’s functions, the many different cellular organelles work together to keep the cell
healthy and performing all of its important functions. The organelles and cytosol, taken together, compose the cell’s
cytoplasm. The nucleus is a cell’s central organelle, which contains the cell’s DNA (Figure 3.13).
concentration gradient when transported out of cells. Active transport generally pumps ions against their
concentration gradient, but the CFTR presents an exception to this rule.
In normal lung tissue, the movement of Cl– out of the cell maintains a Cl–-rich, negatively charged environment
immediately outside of the cell. This is particularly important in the epithelial lining of the respiratory system.
Respiratory epithelial cells secrete mucus, which serves to trap dust, bacteria, and other debris. A cilium (plural
= cilia) is one of the hair-like appendages found on certain cells. Cilia on the epithelial cells move the mucus and
its trapped particles up the airways away from the lungs and toward the outside. In order to be effectively
moved upward, the mucus cannot be too viscous; rather it must have a thin, watery consistency. The transport
of Cl– and the maintenance of an electronegative environment outside of the cell attract positive ions such as
Na+ to the extracellular space. The accumulation of both Cl– and Na+ ions in the extracellular space creates
solute-rich mucus, which has a low concentration of water molecules. As a result, through osmosis, water
moves from cells and extracellular matrix into the mucus, “thinning” it out. This is how, in a normal respiratory
system, the mucus is kept sufficiently watered-down to be propelled out of the respiratory system.
If the CFTR channel is absent, Cl– ions are not transported out of the cell in adequate numbers, thus preventing
them from drawing positive ions. The absence of ions in the secreted mucus results in the lack of a normal water
concentration gradient. Thus, there is no osmotic pressure pulling water into the mucus. The resulting mucus is
thick and sticky, and the ciliated epithelia cannot effectively remove it from the respiratory system. Passageways
in the lungs become blocked with mucus, along with the debris it carries. Bacterial infections occur more easily
because bacterial cells are not effectively carried away from the lungs.

FIGURE 3.13
Prototypical Human Cell
While this image is not indicative of any one particular human cell, it is a prototypical example
of a cell containing the primary organelles and internal structures.
Organelles of the Endomembrane System
A set of three major organelles together form a system within the cell called the endomembrane system. These
organelles work together to perform various cellular jobs, including the task of producing, packaging, and exporting
certain cellular products. The organelles of the endomembrane system include the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi
apparatus, and vesicles.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a system of channels that is continuous with the nuclear membrane (or
“envelope”) covering the nucleus and composed of the same lipid bilayer material. The ER can be thought of as a
series of winding thoroughfares similar to the waterway canals in Venice. The ER provides passages throughout
much of the cell that function in transporting, synthesizing, and storing materials. The winding structure of the ER
results in a large membranous surface area that supports its many functions (Figure 3.14).

FIGURE 3.14
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
(a) The ER is a winding network of thin membranous sacs found in close association with
the cell nucleus. The smooth and rough endoplasmic reticula are very different in appearance and function (source: mouse tissue). (b)
Rough ER is studded with numerous ribosomes, which are sites of protein synthesis (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,000. (c) Smooth ER
synthesizes phospholipids, steroid hormones, regulates the concentration of cellular Ca++, metabolizes some carbohydrates, and breaks
down certain toxins (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,510. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School
© 2012)
Endoplasmic reticulum can exist in two forms: rough ER and smooth ER. These two types of ER perform some very
different functions and can be found in very different amounts depending on the type of cell. Rough ER (RER) is so-
called because its membrane is dotted with embedded granules—organelles called ribosomes, giving the RER a
bumpy appearance. A ribosome is an organelle that serves as the site of protein synthesis. It is composed of two
ribosomal RNA subunits that wrap around mRNA to start the process of translation, followed by protein synthesis.
Smooth ER (SER) lacks these ribosomes.
One of the main functions of the smooth ER is in the synthesis of lipids. The smooth ER synthesizes phospholipids,
the main component of biological membranes, as well as steroid hormones. For this reason, cells that produce large
quantities of such hormones, such as those of the female ovaries and male testes, contain large amounts of smooth
ER. In addition to lipid synthesis, the smooth ER also sequesters (i.e., stores) and regulates the concentration of
cellular Ca++, a function extremely important in cells of the nervous system where Ca++ is the trigger for
neurotransmitter release. The smooth ER additionally metabolizes some carbohydrates and performs a
detoxification role, breaking down certain toxins.
In contrast with the smooth ER, the primary job of the rough ER is the synthesis and modification of proteins
destined for the cell membrane or for export from the cell. For this protein synthesis, many ribosomes attach to the
ER (giving it the studded appearance of rough ER). Typically, a protein is synthesized within the ribosome and
released inside the channel of the rough ER, where sugars can be added to it (by a process called glycosylation)
before it is transported within a vesicle to the next stage in the packaging and shipping process: the Golgi apparatus.
The Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus is responsible for sorting, modifying, and shipping off the products that come from the rough
ER, much like a post-office. The Golgi apparatus looks like stacked flattened discs, almost like stacks of oddly
shaped pancakes. Like the ER, these discs are membranous. The Golgi apparatus has two distinct sides, each with a
different role. One side of the apparatus receives products in vesicles. These products are sorted through the
apparatus, and then they are released from the opposite side after being repackaged into new vesicles. If the
product is to be exported from the cell, the vesicle migrates to the cell surface and fuses to the cell membrane, and
the cargo is secreted (Figure 3.15).
FIGURE 3.15
Golgi Apparatus
(a) The Golgi apparatus manipulates products from the rough ER, and also produces new organelles
called lysosomes. Proteins and other products of the ER are sent to the Golgi apparatus, which organizes, modifies, packages, and tags
them. Some of these products are transported to other areas of the cell and some are exported from the cell through exocytosis. Enzymatic
proteins are packaged as new lysosomes (or packaged and sent for fusion with existing lysosomes). (b) An electron micrograph of the Golgi
apparatus.
Lysosomes
Some of the protein products packaged by the Golgi include digestive enzymes that are meant to remain inside the
cell for use in breaking down certain materials. The enzyme-containing vesicles released by the Golgi may form new
lysosomes, or fuse with existing, lysosomes. A lysosome is an organelle that contains enzymes that break down and
digest unneeded cellular components, such as a damaged organelle. (A lysosome is similar to a wrecking crew that
takes down old and unsound buildings in a neighborhood.) Autophagy (“self-eating”) is the process of a cell
digesting its own structures. Lysosomes are also important for breaking down foreign material. For example, when
certain immune defense cells (white blood cells) phagocytize bacteria, the bacterial cell is transported into a
lysosome and digested by the enzymes inside. As one might imagine, such phagocytic defense cells contain large
numbers of lysosomes.
Under certain circumstances, lysosomes perform a more grand and dire function. In the case of damaged or
unhealthy cells, lysosomes can be triggered to open up and release their digestive enzymes into the cytoplasm of
the cell, killing the cell. This “self-destruct” mechanism is called autolysis, and makes the process of cell death
controlled (a mechanism called “apoptosis”).
INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/endomembrane1) to learn about the endomembrane system, which includes
the rough and smooth ER and the Golgi body as well as lysosomes and vesicles. What is the primary role of the
endomembrane system?

Organelles for Energy Production and Detoxification
In addition to the jobs performed by the endomembrane system, the cell has many other important functions. Just
as you must consume nutrients to provide yourself with energy, so must each of your cells take in nutrients, some of
which convert to chemical energy that can be used to power biochemical reactions. Another important function of
the cell is detoxification. Humans take in all sorts of toxins from the environment and also produce harmful
chemicals as byproducts of cellular processes. Cells called hepatocytes in the liver detoxify many of these toxins.
Mitochondria
A mitochondrion (plural = mitochondria) is a membranous, bean-shaped organelle that is the “energy transformer”
of the cell. Mitochondria consist of an outer lipid bilayer membrane as well as an additional inner lipid bilayer
membrane (Figure 3.16). The inner membrane is highly folded into winding structures with a great deal of surface
area, called cristae. It is along this inner membrane that a series of proteins, enzymes, and other molecules perform
the biochemical reactions of cellular respiration. These reactions convert energy stored in nutrient molecules (such
as glucose) into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which provides usable cellular energy to the cell. Cells use ATP
constantly, and so the mitochondria are constantly at work. Oxygen molecules are required during cellular
respiration, which is why you must constantly breathe it in. One of the organ systems in the body that uses huge
amounts of ATP is the muscular system because ATP is required to sustain muscle contraction. As a result, muscle
cells are packed full of mitochondria. Nerve cells also need large quantities of ATP to run their sodium-potassium
pumps. Therefore, an individual neuron will be loaded with over a thousand mitochondria. On the other hand, a bone
cell, which is not nearly as metabolically-active, might only have a couple hundred mitochondria.
FIGURE 3.16
Mitochondrion
The mitochondria are the energy-conversion factories of the cell. (a) A mitochondrion is composed of two
separate lipid bilayer membranes. Along the inner membrane are various molecules that work together to produce ATP, the cell’s major
energy currency. (b) An electron micrograph of mitochondria. EM × 236,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
Peroxisomes
Like lysosomes, a peroxisome is a membrane-bound cellular organelle that contains mostly enzymes (Figure 3.17).
Peroxisomes perform a couple of different functions, including lipid metabolism and chemical detoxification. In
contrast to the digestive enzymes found in lysosomes, the enzymes within peroxisomes serve to transfer hydrogen
atoms from various molecules to oxygen, producing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In this way, peroxisomes neutralize
poisons such as alcohol. In order to appreciate the importance of peroxisomes, it is necessary to understand the
concept of reactive oxygen species.

FIGURE 3.17
Peroxisome
Peroxisomes are membrane-bound organelles that contain an abundance of enzymes for detoxifying harmful
substances and lipid metabolism.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as peroxides and free radicals are the highly reactive products of many normal
cellular processes, including the mitochondrial reactions that produce ATP and oxygen metabolism. Examples of
ROS include the hydroxyl radical OH, H2O2, and superoxide (
). Some ROS are important for certain cellular
functions, such as cell signaling processes and immune responses against foreign substances. Free radicals are
reactive because they contain free unpaired electrons; they can easily oxidize other molecules throughout the cell,
causing cellular damage and even cell death. Free radicals are thought to play a role in many destructive processes
in the body, from cancer to coronary artery disease.
Peroxisomes, on the other hand, oversee reactions that neutralize free radicals. Peroxisomes produce large amounts
of the toxic H2O2 in the process, but peroxisomes contain enzymes that convert H2O2 into water and oxygen. These
byproducts are safely released into the cytoplasm. Like miniature sewage treatment plants, peroxisomes neutralize
harmful toxins so that they do not wreak havoc in the cells. The liver is the organ primarily responsible for
detoxifying the blood before it travels throughout the body, and liver cells contain an exceptionally high number of
peroxisomes.
Defense mechanisms such as detoxification within the peroxisome and certain cellular antioxidants serve to
neutralize many of these molecules. Some vitamins and other substances, found primarily in fruits and vegetables,
have antioxidant properties. Antioxidants work by being oxidized themselves, halting the destructive reaction
cascades initiated by the free radicals. Sometimes though, ROS accumulate beyond the capacity of such defenses.
Oxidative stress is the term used to describe damage to cellular components caused by ROS. Due to their
characteristic unpaired electrons, ROS can set off chain reactions where they remove electrons from other
molecules, which then become oxidized and reactive, and do the same to other molecules, causing a chain reaction.
ROS can cause permanent damage to cellular lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. Damaged DNA can
lead to genetic mutations and even cancer. A mutation is a change in the nucleotide sequence in a gene within a
cell’s DNA, potentially altering the protein coded by that gene. Other diseases believed to be triggered or
exacerbated by ROS include Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, arthritis,
Huntington’s disease, and schizophrenia, among many others. It is noteworthy that these diseases are largely age-
related. Many scientists believe that oxidative stress is a major contributor to the aging process.
Aging and the...
Cell: The Free Radical Theory
The free radical theory on aging was originally proposed in the 1950s, and still remains under debate. Generally
speaking, the free radical theory of aging suggests that accumulated cellular damage from oxidative stress
contributes to the physiological and anatomical effects of aging. There are two significantly different versions of
this theory: one states that the aging process itself is a result of oxidative damage, and the other states that
oxidative damage causes age-related disease and disorders. The latter version of the theory is more widely

The Cytoskeleton
Much like the bony skeleton structurally supports the human body, the cytoskeleton helps the cells to maintain their
structural integrity. The cytoskeleton is a group of fibrous proteins that provide structural support for cells, but this
is only one of the functions of the cytoskeleton. Cytoskeletal components are also critical for cell motility, cell
reproduction, and transportation of substances within the cell.
The cytoskeleton forms a complex thread-like network throughout the cell consisting of three different kinds of
protein-based filaments: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Figure 3.18). The thickest of the
three is the microtubule, a structural filament composed of subunits of a protein called tubulin. Microtubules
maintain cell shape and structure, help resist compression of the cell, and play a role in positioning the organelles
within the cell. Microtubules also make up two types of cellular appendages important for motion: cilia and flagella.
Cilia are found on many cells of the body, including the epithelial cells that line the airways of the respiratory
system. Cilia move rhythmically; they beat constantly, moving waste materials such as dust, mucus, and bacteria
upward through the airways, away from the lungs and toward the mouth. Beating cilia on cells in the female
fallopian tubes move egg cells from the ovary towards the uterus. A flagellum (plural = flagella) is an appendage
larger than a cilium and specialized for cell locomotion. The only flagellated cell in humans is the sperm cell that
must propel itself towards female egg cells.
FIGURE 3.18
The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton consists of (a) microtubules, (b) microfilaments, and (c)
intermediate filaments. The cytoskeleton plays an important role in maintaining cell shape and structure, promoting cellular movement,
and aiding cell division.
A very important function of microtubules is to set the paths (somewhat like railroad tracks) along which the genetic
material can be pulled (a process requiring ATP) during cell division, so that each new daughter cell receives the
appropriate set of chromosomes. Two short, identical microtubule structures called centrioles are found near the
nucleus of cells. A centriole can serve as the cellular origin point for microtubules extending outward as cilia or
flagella or can assist with the separation of DNA during cell division. Microtubules grow out from the centrioles by
adding more tubulin subunits, like adding additional links to a chain.
In contrast with microtubules, the microfilament is a thinner type of cytoskeletal filament (see Figure 3.18b). Actin,
accepted than the former. However, many lines of evidence suggest that oxidative damage does contribute to
the aging process. Research has shown that reducing oxidative damage can result in a longer lifespan in certain
organisms such as yeast, worms, and fruit flies. Conversely, increasing oxidative damage can shorten the
lifespan of mice and worms. Interestingly, a manipulation called calorie-restriction (moderately restricting the
caloric intake) has been shown to increase life span in some laboratory animals. It is believed that this increase
is at least in part due to a reduction of oxidative stress. However, a long-term study of primates with calorie-
restriction showed no increase in their lifespan. A great deal of additional research will be required to better
understand the link between reactive oxygen species and aging.

a protein that forms chains, is the primary component of these microfilaments. Actin fibers, twisted chains of actin
filaments, constitute a large component of muscle tissue and, along with the protein myosin, are responsible for
muscle contraction. Like microtubules, actin filaments are long chains of single subunits (called actin subunits). In
muscle cells, these long actin strands, called thin filaments, are “pulled” by thick filaments of the myosin protein to
contract the cell.
Actin also has an important role during cell division. When a cell is about to split in half during cell division, actin
filaments work with myosin to create a cleavage furrow that eventually splits the cell down the middle, forming two
new cells from the original cell.
The final cytoskeletal filament is the intermediate filament. As its name would suggest, an intermediate filament is
a filament intermediate in thickness between the microtubules and microfilaments (see Figure 3.18c). Intermediate
filaments are made up of long fibrous subunits of a protein called keratin that are wound together like the threads
that compose a rope. Intermediate filaments, in concert with the microtubules, are important for maintaining cell
shape and structure. Unlike the microtubules, which resist compression, intermediate filaments resist tension—the
forces that pull apart cells. There are many cases in which cells are prone to tension, such as when epithelial cells of
the skin are compressed, tugging them in different directions. Intermediate filaments help anchor organelles
together within a cell and also link cells to other cells by forming special cell-to-cell junctions.