17.8 Gonadal and Placental Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the most important hormones produced by the testes and ovaries
•
Name the hormones produced by the placenta and state their functions
This section briefly discusses the hormonal role of the gonads—the testes and ovaries—which produce the sex cells
(sperm and ova) and secrete the gonadal hormones. The roles of the gonadotropins released from the anterior
pituitary (FSH and LH) were discussed earlier.
The primary hormone produced by the testes is testosterone, a steroid hormone important in the development of
the testicular reproductive system, the maturation of sperm cells, and the development of secondary sex
characteristics such as a deepened voice, body hair, and increased muscle mass. Interestingly, testosterone is also
produced in the ovaries, but at a much reduced level. In addition, the testes produce the peptide hormone inhibin,
which inhibits the secretion of FSH from the anterior pituitary gland. FSH stimulates spermatogenesis.
The primary hormones produced by the ovaries are estrogens, which include estradiol, estriol, and estrone.
Estrogens play an important role in a larger number of physiological processes, including the development of the
ovarian reproductive system, regulation of the menstrual cycle, the development of secondary sex characteristics
such as increased adipose tissue and the development of breast tissue, and the maintenance of pregnancy. Another
significant ovarian hormone is progesterone, which contributes to regulation of the menstrual cycle and is
important in preparing the body for pregnancy as well as maintaining pregnancy. In addition, the granulosa cells of
the ovarian follicles produce inhibin, which inhibits the secretion of FSH.During the initial stages of pregnancy, an
organ called the placenta develops within the uterus. The placenta supplies oxygen and nutrients to the fetus,
excretes waste products, and produces and secretes estrogens and progesterone. The placenta produces human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) as well. The hCG hormone promotes progesterone synthesis and reduces the
mother’s immune function to protect the fetus from immune rejection. It also secretes human placental lactogen
(hPL), which plays a role in preparing the breasts for lactation, and relaxin, which is thought to help soften and
widen the pubic symphysis in preparation for childbirth. The hormones controlling reproduction are summarized in
Table 17.6.
Reproductive Hormones
Gonad
Associated
hormones
Chemical
class
Effect
Testes
Testosterone
Steroid
Stimulates development of secondary sex characteristics and
sperm production
Testes
Inhibin
Protein
Inhibits FSH release from pituitary
Ovaries
Estrogens and
progesterone
Steroid
Stimulate development of secondary sex characteristics and
prepare the body for childbirth
Placenta
Human chorionic
gonadotropin
Protein
Promotes progesterone synthesis during pregnancy and inhibits
immune response against fetus
TABLE 17.6
