25.5 Physiology of Urine Formation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the hydrostatic and colloid osmotic forces that favor and oppose filtration
•
Describe glomerular filtration rate (GFR), state the average value of GFR, and explain how clearance rate can be
used to measure GFR
•
Predict specific factors that will increase or decrease GFR
•
State the percent of the filtrate that is normally reabsorbed and explain why the process of reabsorption is so
important
•
Calculate daily urine production
•
List common symptoms of kidney failure
Having reviewed the anatomy and microanatomy of the urinary system, now is the time to focus on the physiology.
You will discover that different parts of the nephron utilize specific processes to produce urine: filtration,
reabsorption, and secretion. You will learn how each of these processes works and where they occur along the
nephron and collecting ducts. The physiologic goal is to modify the composition of the plasma and, in doing so,
produce the waste product urine.
Failure of the renal anatomy and/or physiology can lead suddenly or gradually to renal failure. In this event, a
number of symptoms, signs, or laboratory findings point to the diagnosis (Table 25.3).

Symptoms of Kidney Failure
Weakness
Lethargy
Shortness of breath
Widespread edema
Anemia
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Heart arrhythmias
Uremia (high urea level in the blood)
Loss of appetite
TABLE 25.3

Fatigue
Excessive urination
Oliguria (too little urine output)
TABLE 25.3

Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
The volume of filtrate formed by both kidneys per minute is termed the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The heart
pumps about 5 L blood per min under resting conditions. Approximately 20 percent or one liter enters the kidneys to
be filtered. On average, this liter results in the production of about 125 mL/min filtrate produced in males (range of
90 to 140 mL/min) and 105 mL/min filtrate produced in females (range of 80 to 125 mL/min). This amount equates
to a volume of about 180 L/day in males and 150 L/day in females. Ninety-nine percent of this filtrate is returned to
the circulation by reabsorption so that only about 1–2 liters of urine are produced per day (Table 25.4).

Calculating Urine Formation per Day
Flow per
minute
(mL)
Calculation
Renal
blood flow
1050
Cardiac output is about 5000 mL/minute, of which 21 percent flows through the
kidney.
5000*0.21 = 1050 mL blood/min
Renal
plasma
flow
578
Renal plasma flow equals the blood flow per minute times the hematocrit. If a
person has a hematocrit of 45, then the renal plasma flow is 55 percent.
1050*0.55 = 578 mL plasma/min
Glomerular
filtration
rate
110
The GFR is the amount of plasma entering Bowman’s capsule per minute. It is the
renal plasma flow times the fraction that enters the renal capsule (19 percent).
578*0.19 = 110 mL filtrate/min
Urine
1296 ml/
day
The filtrate not recovered by the kidney is the urine that will be eliminated. It is the
GFR times the fraction of the filtrate that is not reabsorbed (0.8 percent).
110*.008 = 0.9 mL urine /min
Multiply urine/min times 60 minutes times 24 hours to get daily urine production.
0.9*60*24 = 1296 mL/day urine
TABLE 25.4

GFR is influenced by the hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure on either side of the capillary membrane
of the glomerulus. Recall that filtration occurs as pressure forces fluid and solutes through a semipermeable barrier
with the solute movement constrained by particle size. Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure produced by a fluid
against a surface. If you have a fluid on both sides of a barrier, both fluids exert a pressure in opposing directions.
Net fluid movement will be in the direction of the lower pressure. Osmosis is the movement of solvent (water)
across a membrane that is impermeable to a solute in the solution. This creates a pressure, osmotic pressure, which
will exist until the solute concentration is the same on both sides of a semipermeable membrane. As long as the
concentration differs, water will move. Glomerular filtration occurs when glomerular hydrostatic pressure exceeds
the luminal hydrostatic pressure of Bowman’s capsule. There is also an opposing force, the osmotic pressure, which
is typically higher in the glomerular capillary.
To understand why this is so, look more closely at the microenvironment on either side of the filtration membrane.
You will find osmotic pressure exerted by the solutes inside the lumen of the capillary as well as inside of Bowman’s
capsule. Since the filtration membrane limits the size of particles crossing the membrane, the osmotic pressure
inside the glomerular capillary is higher than the osmotic pressure in Bowman’s capsule. Recall that cells and the
medium-to-large proteins cannot pass between the podocyte processes or through the fenestrations of the capillary
endothelial cells. This means that red and white blood cells, platelets, albumins, and other proteins too large to pass
through the filter remain in the capillary, creating an average colloid osmotic pressure of 30 mm Hg within the
capillary. The absence of proteins in Bowman’s space (the lumen within Bowman’s capsule) results in an osmotic
pressure near zero. Thus, the only pressure moving fluid across the capillary wall into the lumen of Bowman’s space
is hydrostatic pressure. Hydrostatic (fluid) pressure is sufficient to push water through the membrane despite the
osmotic pressure working against it. The sum of all of the influences, both osmotic and hydrostatic, results in a net
filtration pressure (NFP) of about 10 mm Hg (Figure 25.16).

FIGURE 25.16
Net Filtration Pressure
The NFP is the sum of osmotic and hydrostatic pressures.

A proper concentration of solutes in the blood is important in maintaining osmotic pressure both in the glomerulus
and systemically. There are disorders in which too much protein passes through the filtration slits into the kidney
filtrate. This excess protein in the filtrate leads to a deficiency of circulating plasma proteins. In turn, the presence of
protein in the urine increases its osmolarity; this holds more water in the filtrate and results in an increase in urine
volume. Because there is less circulating protein, principally albumin, the osmotic pressure of the blood falls. Less
osmotic pressure pulling water into the capillaries tips the balance towards hydrostatic pressure, which tends to
push it out of the capillaries. The net effect is that water is lost from the circulation to interstitial tissues and cells.
This “plumps up” the tissues and cells, a condition termed systemic edema.

Net Filtration Pressure (NFP)
NFP determines filtration rates through the kidney. It is determined as follows:
NFP = Glomerular blood hydrostatic pressure (GBHP) – [capsular hydrostatic pressure (CHP) + blood colloid osmotic
pressure (BCOP)] = 10 mm Hg
That is:
NFP = GBHP – [CHP + BCOP] = 10 mm Hg
Or:
NFP = 55 – [15 + 30] = 10 mm Hg
As you can see, there is a low net pressure across the filtration membrane. Intuitively, you should realize that minor
changes in osmolarity of the blood or changes in capillary blood pressure result in major changes in the amount of
filtrate formed at any given point in time. The kidney is able to cope with a wide range of blood pressures. In large
part, this is due to the autoregulatory nature of smooth muscle. When you stretch it, it contracts. Thus, when blood
pressure goes up, smooth muscle in the afferent capillaries contracts to limit any increase in blood flow and
filtration rate. When blood pressure drops, the same capillaries relax to maintain blood flow and filtration rate. The
net result is a relatively steady flow of blood into the glomerulus and a relatively steady filtration rate in spite of
significant systemic blood pressure changes. Mean arterial blood pressure is calculated by adding 1/3 of the
difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures to the diastolic pressure. Therefore, if the blood pressure is
110/80, the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure is 30. One third of this is 10, and when you add this
to the diastolic pressure of 80, you arrive at a calculated mean arterial pressure of 90 mm Hg. Therefore, if you use
mean arterial pressure for the GBHP in the formula for calculating NFP, you can determine that as long as mean
arterial pressure is above approximately 60 mm Hg, the pressure will be adequate to maintain glomerular filtration.
Blood pressures below this level will impair renal function and cause systemic disorders that are severe enough to
threaten survival. This condition is called shock.
Determination of the GFR is one of the tools used to assess the kidney’s excretory function. This is more than just an
academic exercise. Since many drugs are excreted in the urine, a decline in renal function can lead to toxic
accumulations. Additionally, administration of appropriate drug dosages for those drugs primarily excreted by the
kidney requires an accurate assessment of GFR. GFR can be estimated closely by intravenous administration of
inulin. Inulin is a plant polysaccharide that is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the kidney. Its appearance in the
urine is directly proportional to the rate at which it is filtered by the renal corpuscle. However, since measuring inulin
clearance is cumbersome in the clinical setting, most often, the GFR is estimated by measuring naturally occurring
creatinine, a protein-derived molecule produced by muscle metabolism that is not reabsorbed and only slightly
secreted by the nephron.