2.1 Elements and Atoms: The Building Blocks of Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the relationships between matter, mass, elements, compounds, atoms, and subatomic particles
•
Distinguish between atomic number and mass number
•
Identify the key distinction between isotopes of the same element
•
Explain how electrons occupy electron shells and their contribution to an atom’s relative stability
The substance of the universe—from a grain of sand to a star—is called matter. Scientists define matter as anything
that occupies space and has mass. An object’s mass and its weight are related concepts, but not quite the same. An
object’s mass is the amount of matter contained in the object, and the object’s mass is the same whether that object
is on Earth or in the zero-gravity environment of outer space. An object’s weight, on the other hand, is its mass as
affected by the pull of gravity. Where gravity strongly pulls on an object’s mass its weight is greater than it is where
gravity is less strong. An object of a certain mass weighs less on the moon, for example, than it does on Earth
because the gravity of the moon is less than that of Earth. In other words, weight is variable, and is influenced by
gravity. A piece of cheese that weighs a pound on Earth weighs only a few ounces on the moon.
Elements and Compounds
All matter in the natural world is composed of one or more of the 92 fundamental substances called elements. An
element is a pure substance that is distinguished from all other matter by the fact that it cannot be created or
broken down by ordinary chemical means. While your body can assemble many of the chemical compounds needed
for life from their constituent elements, it cannot make elements. They must come from the environment. A familiar
example of an element that you must take in is calcium (Ca). Calcium is essential to the human body; it is absorbed
and used for a number of processes, including strengthening bones. When you consume dairy products your
digestive system breaks down the food into components small enough to cross into the bloodstream. Among these
is calcium, which, because it is an element, cannot be broken down further. The elemental calcium in cheese,
therefore, is the same as the calcium that forms your bones. Some other elements you might be familiar with are
oxygen, sodium, and iron. The elements in the human body are shown in Figure 2.2, beginning with the most
abundant: oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N). Each element’s name can be replaced by a one- or
two-letter symbol; you will become familiar with some of these during this course. All the elements in your body are
derived from the foods you eat and the air you breathe.
FIGURE 2.2
Elements of the Human Body
The main elements that compose the human body are shown from most abundant to least
abundant.

In nature, elements rarely occur alone. Instead, they combine to form compounds. A compound is a substance
composed of two or more elements joined by chemical bonds. For example, the compound glucose is an important
body fuel. It is always composed of the same three elements: carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Moreover, the
elements that make up any given compound always occur in the same relative amounts. In glucose, there are
always six carbon and six oxygen units for every twelve hydrogen units. But what, exactly, are these “units” of
elements?
Atoms and Subatomic Particles
An atom is the smallest quantity of an element that retains the unique properties of that element. In other words, an
atom of hydrogen is a unit of hydrogen—the smallest amount of hydrogen that can exist. As you might guess, atoms
are almost unfathomably small. The period at the end of this sentence is millions of atoms wide.
Atomic Structure and Energy
Atoms are made up of even smaller subatomic particles, three types of which are important: the proton, neutron,
and electron. The number of positively-charged protons and non-charged (“neutral”) neutrons, gives mass to the
atom, and the number of protons determines the element. The number of negatively-charged electrons that “spin”
around the nucleus at close to the speed of light equals the number of protons. An electron has about 1/2000th the
mass of a proton or neutron.
Figure 2.3 shows two models that can help you imagine the structure of an atom—in this case, helium (He). In the
planetary model, helium’s two electrons are shown circling the nucleus in a fixed orbit depicted as a ring. Although
this model is helpful in visualizing atomic structure, in reality, electrons do not travel in fixed orbits, but whiz around
the nucleus erratically in a so-called electron cloud.
FIGURE 2.3
Two Models of Atomic Structure
(a) In the planetary model, the electrons of helium are shown in fixed orbits, depicted as
rings, at a precise distance from the nucleus, somewhat like planets orbiting the sun. (b) In the electron cloud model, the electrons of
helium are shown in the variety of locations they would have at different distances from the nucleus over time.
An atom’s protons and electrons carry electrical charges. Protons, with their positive charge, are designated p+.
Electrons, which have a negative charge, are designated e–. An atom’s neutrons have no charge: they are electrically

neutral. Just as a magnet sticks to a steel refrigerator because their opposite charges attract, the positively charged
protons attract the negatively charged electrons. This mutual attraction gives the atom some structural stability. The
attraction by the positively charged nucleus helps keep electrons from straying far. The number of protons and
electrons within a neutral atom are equal, thus, the atom’s overall charge is balanced.
Atomic Number and Mass Number
An atom of carbon is unique to carbon, but a proton of carbon is not. One proton is the same as another, whether it is
found in an atom of carbon, sodium (Na), or iron (Fe). The same is true for neutrons and electrons. So, what gives an
element its distinctive properties—what makes carbon so different from sodium or iron? The answer is the unique
quantity of protons each contains. Carbon by definition is an element whose atoms contain six protons. No other
element has exactly six protons in its atoms. Moreover, all atoms of carbon, whether found in your liver or in a lump
of coal, contain six protons. Thus, the atomic number, which is the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom,
identifies the element. Because an atom usually has the same number of electrons as protons, the atomic number
identifies the usual number of electrons as well.
In their most common form, many elements also contain the same number of neutrons as protons. The most
common form of carbon, for example, has six neutrons as well as six protons, for a total of 12 subatomic particles in
its nucleus. An element’s mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus. So the
most common form of carbon’s mass number is 12. (Electrons have so little mass that they do not appreciably
contribute to the mass of an atom.) Carbon is a relatively light element. Uranium (U), in contrast, has a mass number
of 238 and is referred to as a heavy metal. Its atomic number is 92 (it has 92 protons) but it contains 146 neutrons;
it has the most mass of all the naturally occurring elements.
The periodic table of the elements, shown in Figure 2.4, is a chart identifying the 92 elements found in nature, as
well as several larger, unstable elements discovered experimentally. The elements are arranged in order of their
atomic number, with hydrogen and helium at the top of the table, and the more massive elements below. The
periodic table is a useful device because for each element, it identifies the chemical symbol, the atomic number, and
the mass number, while organizing elements according to their propensity to react with other elements. The number
of protons and electrons in an element are equal. The number of protons and neutrons may be equal for some
elements, but are not equal for all.

FIGURE 2.4
The Periodic Table of the Elements
(credit: R.A. Dragoset, A. Musgrove, C.W. Clark, W.C. Martin)
INTERACTIVE LINK
Visit this website (http://openstax.org/l/ptable) to view the periodic table. In the periodic table of the elements,
elements in a single column have the same number of electrons that can participate in a chemical reaction. These
electrons are known as “valence electrons.” For example, the elements in the first column all have a single valence
electron, an electron that can be “donated” in a chemical reaction with another atom. What is the meaning of a mass
number shown in parentheses?
Isotopes
Although each element has a unique number of protons, it can exist as different isotopes. An isotope is one of the
different forms of an element, distinguished from one another by different numbers of neutrons. The standard
isotope of carbon is 12C, commonly called carbon twelve. 12C has six protons and six neutrons, for a mass number of
twelve. All of the isotopes of carbon have the same number of protons; therefore, 13C has seven neutrons, and 14C
has eight neutrons. The different isotopes of an element can also be indicated with the mass number hyphenated
(for example, C-12 instead of 12C). Hydrogen has three common isotopes, shown in Figure 2.5.

FIGURE 2.5
Isotopes of Hydrogen
Protium, designated 1H, has one proton and no neutrons. It is by far the most abundant isotope of
hydrogen in nature. Deuterium, designated 2H, has one proton and one neutron. Tritium, designated 3H, has two neutrons.
An isotope that contains more than the usual number of neutrons is referred to as a heavy isotope. An example is
14C. Heavy isotopes tend to be unstable, and unstable isotopes are radioactive. A radioactive isotope is an isotope
whose nucleus readily decays, giving off subatomic particles and electromagnetic energy. Different radioactive
isotopes (also called radioisotopes) differ in their half-life, the time it takes for half of any size sample of an isotope
to decay. For example, the half-life of tritium—a radioisotope of hydrogen—is about 12 years, indicating it takes 12
years for half of the tritium nuclei in a sample to decay. Excessive exposure to radioactive isotopes can damage
human cells and even cause cancer and birth defects, but when exposure is controlled, some radioactive isotopes
can be useful in medicine. For more information, see the Career Connections.
CAREER CONNECTION
Interventional Radiologist
The controlled use of radioisotopes has advanced medical diagnosis and treatment of disease. Interventional
radiologists are physicians who treat disease by using minimally invasive techniques involving radiation. Many
conditions that could once only be treated with a lengthy and traumatic operation can now be treated non-
surgically, reducing the cost, pain, length of hospital stay, and recovery time for patients. For example, in the past,
the only options for a patient with one or more tumors in the liver were surgery and chemotherapy (the
administration of drugs to treat cancer). Some liver tumors, however, are difficult to access surgically, and others
could require the surgeon to remove too much of the liver. Moreover, chemotherapy is highly toxic to the liver, and
certain tumors do not respond well to it anyway. In some such cases, an interventional radiologist can treat the
tumors by disrupting their blood supply, which they need if they are to continue to grow. In this procedure, called
radioembolization, the radiologist accesses the liver with a fine needle, threaded through one of the patient’s blood
vessels. The radiologist then inserts tiny radioactive “seeds” into the blood vessels that supply the tumors. In the
days and weeks following the procedure, the radiation emitted from the seeds destroys the vessels and directly kills
the tumor cells in the vicinity of the treatment.
Radioisotopes emit subatomic particles that can be detected and tracked by imaging technologies. One of the most
advanced uses of radioisotopes in medicine is the positron emission tomography (PET) scanner, which detects the
activity in the body of a very small injection of radioactive glucose, the simple sugar that cells use for energy. The
PET camera reveals to the medical team which of the patient’s tissues are taking up the most glucose. Thus, the
most metabolically active tissues show up as bright “hot spots” on the images (Figure 2.6). PET can reveal some
cancerous masses because cancer cells consume glucose at a high rate to fuel their rapid reproduction.

FIGURE 2.6
PET Scan
PET highlights areas in the body where there is relatively high glucose use, which is characteristic of cancerous
tissue. This PET scan shows sites of the spread of a large primary tumor to other sites.
The Behavior of Electrons
In the human body, atoms do not exist as independent entities. Rather, they are constantly reacting with other
atoms to form and to break down more complex substances. To fully understand anatomy and physiology you must
grasp how atoms participate in such reactions. The key is understanding the behavior of electrons.
Although electrons do not follow rigid orbits a set distance away from the atom’s nucleus, they do tend to stay
within certain regions of space called electron shells. An electron shell is a layer of electrons that encircle the
nucleus at a distinct energy level.
The atoms of the elements found in the human body have from one to five electron shells, and all electron shells
hold eight electrons except the first shell, which can only hold two. This configuration of electron shells is the same
for all atoms. The precise number of shells depends on the number of electrons in the atom. Hydrogen and helium
have just one and two electrons, respectively. If you take a look at the periodic table of the elements, you will notice
that hydrogen and helium are placed alone on either sides of the top row; they are the only elements that have just
one electron shell (Figure 2.7). A second shell is necessary to hold the electrons in all elements larger than hydrogen
and helium.
Lithium (Li), whose atomic number is 3, has three electrons. Two of these fill the first electron shell, and the third
spills over into a second shell. The second electron shell can accommodate as many as eight electrons. Carbon, with
its six electrons, entirely fills its first shell, and half-fills its second. With ten electrons, neon (Ne) entirely fills its two
electron shells. Again, a look at the periodic table reveals that all of the elements in the second row, from lithium to
neon, have just two electron shells. Atoms with more than ten electrons require more than two shells. These
elements occupy the third and subsequent rows of the periodic table.

FIGURE 2.7
Electron Shells
Electrons orbit the atomic nucleus at distinct levels of energy called electron shells. (a) With one electron,
hydrogen only half-fills its electron shell. Helium also has a single shell, but its two electrons completely fill it. (b) The electrons of carbon
completely fill its first electron shell, but only half-fills its second. (c) Neon, an element that does not occur in the body, has 10 electrons,
filling both of its electron shells.
The factor that most strongly governs the tendency of an atom to participate in chemical reactions is the number of
electrons in its valence shell. A valence shell is an atom’s outermost electron shell. If the valence shell is full, the
atom is stable; meaning its electrons are unlikely to be pulled away from the nucleus by the electrical charge of
other atoms. If the valence shell is not full, the atom is reactive; meaning it will tend to react with other atoms in
ways that make the valence shell full. Consider hydrogen, with its one electron only half-filling its valence shell. This
single electron is likely to be drawn into relationships with the atoms of other elements, so that hydrogen’s single
valence shell can be stabilized.
All atoms (except hydrogen and helium with their single electron shells) are most stable when there are exactly
eight electrons in their valence shell. This principle is referred to as the octet rule, and it states that an atom will give
up, gain, or share electrons with another atom so that it ends up with eight electrons in its own valence shell. For
example, oxygen, with six electrons in its valence shell, is likely to react with other atoms in a way that results in the
addition of two electrons to oxygen’s valence shell, bringing the number to eight. When two hydrogen atoms each
share their single electron with oxygen, covalent bonds are formed, resulting in a molecule of water, H2O.
In nature, atoms of one element tend to join with atoms of other elements in characteristic ways. For example,
carbon commonly fills its valence shell by linking up with four atoms of hydrogen. In so doing, the two elements
form the simplest of organic molecules, methane, which also is one of the most abundant and stable carbon-
containing compounds on Earth. As stated above, another example is water; oxygen needs two electrons to fill its
valence shell. It commonly interacts with two atoms of hydrogen, forming H2O. Incidentally, the name “hydrogen”
reflects its contribution to water (hydro- = “water”; -gen = “maker”). Thus, hydrogen is the “water maker.”
