28.2 Embryonic Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Distinguish the stages of embryonic development that occur before implantation
•
Describe the process of implantation
•
List and describe four embryonic membranes
•
Explain gastrulation
•
Describe how the placenta is formed and identify its functions
•
Explain how an embryo transforms from a flat disc of cells into a three-dimensional shape resembling a human
•
Summarize the process of organogenesis
Throughout this chapter, we will express embryonic and fetal ages in terms of weeks from fertilization, commonly
called conception. The period of time required for full development of a fetus in utero is referred to as gestation
(gestare = “to carry” or “to bear”). It can be subdivided into distinct gestational periods. The first 2 weeks of
prenatal development are referred to as the pre-embryonic stage. A developing human is referred to as an embryo
during weeks 3–8, and a fetus from the ninth week of gestation until birth. In this section, we’ll cover the pre-
embryonic and embryonic stages of development, which are characterized by cell division, migration, and
differentiation. By the end of the embryonic period, all of the organ systems are structured in rudimentary form,
although the organs themselves are either nonfunctional or only semi-functional.

Pre-implantation Embryonic Development
Following fertilization, the zygote and its associated membranes, together referred to as the conceptus, continue to
be projected toward the uterus by peristalsis and beating cilia of the epithelial cells of the Fallopian tube. During its
journey to the uterus, the zygote undergoes five or six rapid mitotic cell divisions. Although each cleavage results in
more cells, it does not increase the total volume of the conceptus (Figure 28.4). Each daughter cell produced by
cleavage is called a blastomere (blastos = “germ,” in the sense of a seed or sprout).
Approximately 3 days after fertilization, a 16-cell conceptus reaches the uterus. The cells that had been loosely
grouped are now compacted and look more like a solid mass. The name given to this structure is the morula (morula
= “little mulberry”). Once inside the uterus, the conceptus floats freely for several more days. It continues to divide,
creating a ball of approximately 100 cells, and consuming nutritive endometrial secretions called uterine milk while
the uterine lining thickens. The ball of now tightly bound cells starts to secrete fluid and organize themselves around
a fluid-filled cavity, the blastocoel. At this developmental stage, the conceptus is referred to as a blastocyst. Within
this structure, a group of cells forms into an inner cell mass, which is fated to become the embryo. The cells that
form the outer shell are called trophoblasts (trophe = “to feed” or “to nourish”). These cells will develop into the
chorionic sac and the fetal portion of the placenta (the organ of nutrient, waste, and gas exchange between a
pregnant person and the developing offspring).
The inner mass of embryonic cells is totipotent during this stage, meaning that each cell has the potential to
differentiate into any cell type in the human body. Totipotency lasts for only a few days before the cells’ fates are set
as being the precursors to a specific lineage of cells.

FIGURE 28.4
Pre-Embryonic Cleavages
Pre-embryonic cleavages make use of the abundant cytoplasm of the conceptus as the cells
rapidly divide without changing the total volume.

As the blastocyst forms, the trophoblast excretes enzymes that begin to degrade the zona pellucida. In a process
called “hatching,” the conceptus breaks free of the zona pellucida in preparation for implantation.

INTERACTIVE LINK
View this time-lapse movie (http://openstax.org/l/conceptus) of a conceptus starting at day 3. What is the first
structure you see? At what point in the movie does the blastocoel first appear? What event occurs at the end of the
movie?

Implantation
At the end of the first week, the blastocyst comes in contact with the uterine wall and adheres to it, embedding itself
in the uterine lining via the trophoblast cells. Thus begins the process of implantation, which signals the end of the
pre-embryonic stage of development (Figure 28.5). Implantation can be accompanied by minor bleeding. The
blastocyst typically implants in the fundus of the uterus or on the posterior wall. However, if the endometrium is not
fully developed and ready to receive the blastocyst, the blastocyst will detach and find a better spot. A significant
percentage (50–75 percent) of blastocysts fail to implant; when this occurs, the blastocyst is shed with the
endometrium during menses. The high rate of implantation failure is one reason why pregnancy typically requires
several ovulation cycles to achieve.

FIGURE 28.5
Pre-Embryonic Development
Ovulation, fertilization, pre-embryonic development, and implantation occur at specific
locations within the female reproductive system in a time span of approximately 1 week.

When implantation succeeds and the blastocyst adheres to the endometrium, the superficial cells of the trophoblast
fuse with each other, forming the syncytiotrophoblast, a multinucleated body that digests endometrial cells to
firmly secure the blastocyst to the uterine wall. In response, the uterine mucosa rebuilds itself and envelops the
blastocyst (Figure 28.6). The trophoblast secretes human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a hormone that directs
the corpus luteum to survive, enlarge, and continue producing progesterone and estrogen to suppress menses.
These functions of hCG are necessary for creating an environment suitable for the developing embryo. As a result of
this increased production, hCG accumulates in the maternal bloodstream and is excreted in the urine. Implantation
is complete by the middle of the second week. Just a few days after implantation, the trophoblast has secreted
enough hCG for an at-home urine pregnancy test to give a positive result.

FIGURE 28.6
Implantation
During implantation, the trophoblast cells of the blastocyst adhere to the endometrium and digest
endometrial cells until it is attached securely.

Most of the time an embryo implants within the body of the uterus in a location that can support growth and
development. However, in one to two percent of cases, the embryo implants either outside the uterus (an ectopic
pregnancy) or in a region of uterus that can create complications for the pregnancy. If the embryo implants in the
inferior portion of the uterus, the placenta can potentially grow over the opening of the cervix, a condition call
placenta previa.

Disorders of the...
Development of the Embryo
In the vast majority of ectopic pregnancies, the embryo does not complete its journey to the uterus and implants
in the uterine tube, referred to as a tubal pregnancy. However, there are also ovarian ectopic pregnancies (in
which the egg never left the ovary) and abdominal ectopic pregnancies (in which an egg was “lost” to the
abdominal cavity during the transfer from ovary to uterine tube, or in which an embryo from a tubal pregnancy
re-implanted in the abdomen). Once in the abdominal cavity, an embryo can implant into any well-vascularized
structure—the rectouterine cavity (Douglas’ pouch), the mesentery of the intestines, and the greater omentum
are some common sites.
Tubal pregnancies can be caused by scar tissue within the tube following a sexually transmitted bacterial
infection. The scar tissue impedes the progress of the embryo into the uterus—in some cases “snagging” the
embryo and, in other cases, blocking the tube completely. Approximately one half of tubal pregnancies resolve
spontaneously. Implantation in a uterine tube causes bleeding, which appears to stimulate smooth muscle
contractions and expulsion of the embryo. In the remaining cases, medical or surgical intervention is necessary.
If an ectopic pregnancy is detected early, the embryo’s development can be arrested by the administration of
the cytotoxic drug methotrexate, which inhibits the metabolism of folic acid. If diagnosis is late and the uterine
tube is already ruptured, surgical repair is essential.
Even if the embryo has successfully found its way to the uterus, it does not always implant in an optimal location
(the fundus or the posterior wall of the uterus). Placenta previa can result if an embryo implants close to the
internal os of the uterus (the internal opening of the cervix). As the fetus grows, the placenta can partially or
completely cover the opening of the cervix (Figure 28.7). Although it occurs in only 0.5 percent of pregnancies,
placenta previa is the leading cause of antepartum hemorrhage (profuse vaginal bleeding after week 24 of
pregnancy but prior to childbirth).
FIGURE 28.7
Placenta Previa
An embryo that implants too close to the opening of the cervix can lead to placenta previa, a
condition in which the placenta partially or completely covers the cervix.

Embryonic Membranes
During the second week of development, with the embryo implanted in the uterus, cells within the blastocyst start
to organize into layers. Some grow to form the extra-embryonic membranes needed to support and protect the
growing embryo: the amnion, the yolk sac, the allantois, and the chorion.
At the beginning of the second week, the cells of the inner cell mass form into a two-layered disc of embryonic cells,
and a space—the amniotic cavity—opens up between it and the trophoblast (Figure 28.8). Cells from the upper
layer of the disc (the epiblast) extend around the amniotic cavity, creating a membranous sac that forms into the
amnion by the end of the second week. The amnion fills with amniotic fluid and eventually grows to surround the
embryo. Early in development, amniotic fluid consists almost entirely of a filtrate of maternal plasma, but as the
kidneys of the fetus begin to function at approximately the eighth week, they add urine to the volume of amniotic
fluid. Floating within the amniotic fluid, the embryo—and later, the fetus—is protected from trauma and rapid
temperature changes. It can move freely within the fluid and can prepare for swallowing and breathing out of the
uterus.

FIGURE 28.8
Development of the Embryonic Disc
Formation of the embryonic disc leaves spaces on either side that develop into the
amniotic cavity and the yolk sac.

On the ventral side of the embryonic disc, opposite the amnion, cells in the lower layer of the embryonic disk (the
hypoblast) extend into the blastocyst cavity and form a yolk sac. The yolk sac supplies some nutrients absorbed
from the trophoblast and also provides primitive blood circulation to the developing embryo for the second and third
week of development. When the placenta takes over nourishing the embryo at approximately week 4, the yolk sac
has been greatly reduced in size and its main function is to serve as the source of blood cells and germ cells (cells
that will give rise to gametes). During week 3, a finger-like outpocketing of the yolk sac develops into the allantois, a
primitive excretory duct of the embryo that will become part of the urinary bladder. Together, the stalks of the yolk
sac and allantois establish the outer structure of the umbilical cord.
The last of the extra-embryonic membranes is the chorion, which is the one membrane that surrounds all others.
The development of the chorion will be discussed in more detail shortly, as it relates to the growth and development
of the placenta.

Embryogenesis
As the third week of development begins, the two-layered disc of cells becomes a three-layered disc through the
process of gastrulation, during which the cells transition from totipotency to multipotency. The embryo, which takes
the shape of an oval-shaped disc, forms an indentation called the primitive streak along the dorsal surface of the
epiblast. A node at the caudal or “tail” end of the primitive streak emits growth factors that direct cells to multiply
and migrate. Cells migrate toward and through the primitive streak and then move laterally to create two new layers
of cells. The first layer is the endoderm, a sheet of cells that displaces the hypoblast and lies adjacent to the yolk
sac. The second layer of cells fills in as the middle layer, or mesoderm. The cells of the epiblast that remain (not
having migrated through the primitive streak) become the ectoderm (Figure 28.9).

FIGURE 28.9
Germ Layers
Formation of the three primary germ layers occurs during the first 2 weeks of development. The embryo at
this stage is only a few millimeters in length.

Each of these germ layers will develop into specific structures in the embryo. Whereas the ectoderm and endoderm
form tightly connected epithelial sheets, the mesodermal cells are less organized and exist as a loosely connected
cell community. The ectoderm gives rise to cell lineages that differentiate to become the central and peripheral
nervous systems, sensory organs, epidermis, hair, and nails. Mesodermal cells ultimately become the skeleton,
muscles, connective tissue, heart, blood vessels, and kidneys. The endoderm goes on to form the epithelial lining of
the gastrointestinal tract, liver, and pancreas, as well as the lungs (Figure 28.10).

FIGURE 28.10
Fates of Germ Layers in Embryo
Following gastrulation of the embryo in the third week, embryonic cells of the
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm begin to migrate and differentiate into the cell lineages that will give rise to mature organs and organ
systems in the infant.

Development of the Placenta
During the first several weeks of development, the cells of the endometrium—referred to as decidual cells—nourish
the nascent embryo. During prenatal weeks 4–12, the developing placenta gradually takes over the role of feeding
the embryo, and the decidual cells are no longer needed. The mature placenta is composed of tissues derived from
the embryo, as well as maternal tissues of the endometrium. The placenta connects to the conceptus via the
umbilical cord, which carries deoxygenated blood and wastes from the fetus through two umbilical arteries;
nutrients and oxygen are carried from the pregnant person to the fetus through the single umbilical vein. The
umbilical cord is surrounded by the amnion, and the spaces within the cord around the blood vessels are filled with
Wharton’s jelly, a mucous connective tissue.
The maternal portion of the placenta develops from the deepest layer of the endometrium, the decidua basalis. To
form the embryonic portion of the placenta, the syncytiotrophoblast and the underlying cells of the trophoblast
(cytotrophoblast cells) begin to proliferate along with a layer of extraembryonic mesoderm cells. These form the
chorionic membrane, which envelops the entire conceptus as the chorion. The chorionic membrane forms finger-
like structures called chorionic villi that burrow into the endometrium like tree roots, making up the fetal portion of
the placenta. The cytotrophoblast cells perforate the chorionic villi, burrow farther into the endometrium, and
remodel maternal blood vessels to augment maternal blood flow surrounding the villi. Meanwhile, fetal
mesenchymal cells derived from the mesoderm fill the villi and differentiate into blood vessels, including the three
umbilical blood vessels that connect the embryo to the developing placenta (Figure 28.11).

FIGURE 28.11
Cross-Section of the Placenta
In the placenta, maternal and fetal blood components are conducted through the
surface of the chorionic villi, but maternal and fetal bloodstreams never mix directly.

The placenta develops throughout the embryonic period and during the first several weeks of the fetal period;
placentation is complete by weeks 14–16. As a fully developed organ, the placenta provides nutrition and
excretion, respiration, and endocrine function (Table 28.1 and Figure 28.12). It receives blood from the fetus
through the umbilical arteries. Capillaries in the chorionic villi filter fetal wastes out of the blood and return clean,
oxygenated blood to the fetus through the umbilical vein. Nutrients and oxygen are transferred from maternal blood
surrounding the villi through the capillaries and into the fetal bloodstream. Some substances move across the
placenta by simple diffusion. Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and any other lipid-soluble substances take this route. Other
substances move across by facilitated diffusion. This includes water-soluble glucose. The fetus has a high demand
for amino acids and iron, and those substances are moved across the placenta by active transport.
Maternal and fetal blood does not commingle because blood cells cannot move across the placenta. This separation
prevents the pregnant person's cytotoxic T cells from reaching and subsequently destroying the fetus, which bears
“non-self” antigens. Further, it ensures the fetal red blood cells do not enter the pregnant person's circulation and
trigger antibody development (if they carry “non-self” antigens)—at least until the final stages of pregnancy or birth.
This is the reason that, even in the absence of preventive treatment, an Rh− person doesn’t develop antibodies that
could cause hemolytic disease in their first Rh+ fetus.

Although blood cells are not exchanged, the chorionic villi provide ample surface area for the two-way exchange of
substances between maternal and fetal blood. The rate of exchange increases throughout gestation as the villi
become thinner and increasingly branched. The placenta is permeable to lipid-soluble fetotoxic substances:
alcohol, nicotine, barbiturates, antibiotics, certain pathogens, and many other substances that can be dangerous or
fatal to the developing embryo or fetus. For these reasons, pregnant people should avoid fetotoxic substances.
Alcohol consumption by pregnant people, for example, can result in a range of abnormalities referred to as fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD). These include organ and facial malformations, as well as cognitive and
behavioral disorders.

Functions of the Placenta
Nutrition and digestion
Respiration
Endocrine function
•
Mediates diffusion of
maternal glucose, amino
acids, fatty acids, vitamins,
and minerals
•
Stores nutrients during
early pregnancy to
accommodate increased
fetal demand later in
pregnancy
•
Excretes and filters fetal
nitrogenous wastes into
maternal blood
•
Mediates maternal-to-
fetal oxygen transport
and fetal-to-maternal
carbon dioxide transport
•
Secretes several hormones, including hCG,
estrogens, and progesterone, to maintain
the pregnancy and stimulate maternal and
fetal development
•
Mediates the transmission of maternal
hormones into fetal blood and vice versa
TABLE 28.1

FIGURE 28.12
Placenta
This post-expulsion placenta and umbilical cord (white) are viewed from the fetal side.

Organogenesis
Following gastrulation, rudiments of the central nervous system develop from the ectoderm in the process of
neurulation (Figure 28.13). Specialized neuroectodermal tissues along the length of the embryo thicken into the
neural plate. During the fourth week, tissues on either side of the plate fold upward into a neural fold. The two folds
converge to form the neural tube. The tube lies atop a rod-shaped, mesoderm-derived notochord, which eventually
becomes the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral discs. Block-like structures called somites form on either side of
the tube, eventually differentiating into the axial skeleton, skeletal muscle, and dermis. During the fourth and fifth
weeks, the anterior neural tube dilates and subdivides to form vesicles that will become the brain structures.
Folate, one of the B vitamins, is important to the healthy development of the neural tube. A deficiency of maternal
folate in the first weeks of pregnancy can result in neural tube defects, including spina bifida—a birth defect in which
spinal tissue protrudes through the newborn’s vertebral column, which has failed to completely close. A more
severe neural tube defect is anencephaly, a partial or complete absence of brain tissue.

FIGURE 28.13
Neurulation
The embryonic process of neurulation establishes the rudiments of the future central nervous system and
skeleton.

The embryo, which begins as a flat sheet of cells, begins to acquire a cylindrical shape through the process of
embryonic folding (Figure 28.14). The embryo folds laterally and again at either end, forming a C-shape with
distinct head and tail ends. The embryo envelops a portion of the yolk sac, which protrudes with the umbilical cord
from what will become the abdomen. The folding essentially creates a tube, called the primitive gut, that is lined by
the endoderm. The amniotic sac, which was sitting on top of the flat embryo, envelops the embryo as it folds.

FIGURE 28.14
Embryonic Folding
Embryonic folding converts a flat sheet of cells into a hollow, tube-like structure.

Within the first 8 weeks of gestation, a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs
and tissues from the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. This process is called organogenesis.
Like the central nervous system, the heart also begins its development in the embryo as a tube-like structure,
connected via capillaries to the chorionic villi. Cells of the primitive tube-shaped heart are capable of electrical
conduction and contraction. The heart begins beating in the beginning of the fourth week, although it does not
actually pump embryonic blood until a week later, when the oversized liver has begun producing red blood cells.
(This is a temporary responsibility of the embryonic liver that the bone marrow will assume during fetal
development.) During weeks 4–5, the eye pits form, limb buds become apparent, and the rudiments of the
pulmonary system are formed.
During the sixth week, uncontrolled fetal limb movements begin to occur. The gastrointestinal system develops too
rapidly for the embryonic abdomen to accommodate it, and the intestines temporarily loop into the umbilical cord.
Paddle-shaped hands and feet develop fingers and toes by the process of apoptosis (programmed cell death), which
causes the tissues between the fingers to disintegrate. By week 7, the facial structure is more complex and includes
nostrils, outer ears, and lenses (Figure 28.15). By the eighth week, the head is nearly as large as the rest of the
embryo’s body, and all major brain structures are in place. The external genitalia are apparent, but at this point,
male and female embryos are indistinguishable. Bone begins to replace cartilage in the embryonic skeleton through
the process of ossification. By the end of the embryonic period, the embryo is approximately 3 cm (1.2 in) from
crown to rump and weighs approximately 8 g (0.25 oz).

FIGURE 28.15
Embryo at 7 Weeks
An embryo at the end of 7 weeks of development is only 10 mm in length, but its developing eyes,
limb buds, and tail are already visible. (This embryo was derived from an ectopic pregnancy.) (credit: Ed Uthman)

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/embryogenesis) to view the process of embryogenesis from fertilization
through pregnancy to birth. Can you identify when neurulation occurs in the embryo?
