24.2 Carbohydrate Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the processes of glycolysis
•
Describe the pathway of a pyruvate molecule through the Krebs cycle
•
Explain the transport of electrons through the electron transport chain
•
Describe the process of ATP production through oxidative phosphorylation
•
Summarize the process of gluconeogenesis
Carbohydrates are organic molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. The family of
carbohydrates includes both simple and complex sugars. Glucose and fructose are examples of simple sugars, and
starch, glycogen, and cellulose are all examples of complex sugars. The complex sugars are also called
polysaccharides and are made of multiple monosaccharide molecules. Polysaccharides serve as energy storage
(e.g., starch and glycogen) and as structural components (e.g., chitin in insects and cellulose in plants).
During digestion, carbohydrates are broken down into simple, soluble sugars that can be transported across the
intestinal wall into the circulatory system to be transported throughout the body. Carbohydrate digestion begins in
the mouth with the action of salivary amylase on starches and ends with monosaccharides being absorbed across
the epithelium of the small intestine. Once the absorbed monosaccharides are transported to the tissues, the
process of cellular respiration begins (Figure 24.4). This section will focus first on glycolysis, a process where the
monosaccharide glucose is oxidized, releasing the energy stored in its bonds to produce ATP.

FIGURE 24.4
Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration oxidizes glucose molecules through glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and oxidative
phosphorylation to produce ATP.

Glycolysis
Glucose is the body’s most readily available source of energy. After digestive processes break polysaccharides down
into monosaccharides, including glucose, the monosaccharides are transported across the wall of the small
intestine and into the circulatory system, which transports them to the liver. In the liver, hepatocytes either pass the
glucose on through the circulatory system or store excess glucose as glycogen. Cells in the body take up the
circulating glucose in response to insulin and, through a series of reactions called glycolysis, transfer some of the
energy in glucose to ADP to form ATP (Figure 24.5). The last step in glycolysis produces the product pyruvate.
Glycolysis begins with the phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase to form glucose-6-phosphate. This step uses
one ATP, which is the donor of the phosphate group. Under the action of phosphofructokinase, glucose-6-phosphate
is converted into fructose-6-phosphate. At this point, a second ATP donates its phosphate group, forming
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. This six-carbon sugar is split to form two phosphorylated three-carbon molecules,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which are both converted into
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is further phosphorylated with groups donated by
dihydrogen phosphate present in the cell to form the three-carbon molecule 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. The energy
of this reaction comes from the oxidation of (removal of electrons from) glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. In a series of
reactions leading to pyruvate, the two phosphate groups are then transferred to two ADPs to form two ATPs. Thus,
glycolysis uses two ATPs but generates four ATPs, yielding a net gain of two ATPs and two molecules of pyruvate. In
the presence of oxygen, pyruvate continues on to the Krebs cycle (also called the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic
acid cycle (TCA), where additional energy is extracted and passed on.

FIGURE 24.5
Glycolysis Overview
During the energy-consuming phase of glycolysis, two ATPs are consumed, transferring two
phosphates to the glucose molecule. The glucose molecule then splits into two three-carbon compounds, each containing a phosphate.
During the second phase, an additional phosphate is added to each of the three-carbon compounds. The energy for this endergonic
reaction is provided by the removal (oxidation) of two electrons from each three-carbon compound. During the energy-releasing phase, the
phosphates are removed from both three-carbon compounds and used to produce four ATP molecules.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/glycolysis1) to learn about glycolysis.
Glycolysis can be divided into two phases: energy consuming (also called chemical priming) and energy yielding.
The first phase is the energy-consuming phase, so it requires two ATP molecules to start the reaction for each
molecule of glucose. However, the end of the reaction produces four ATPs, resulting in a net gain of two ATP energy
molecules.
Glycolysis can be expressed as the following equation:
This equation states that glucose, in combination with ATP (the energy source), NAD+ (a coenzyme that serves as an
electron acceptor), and inorganic phosphate, breaks down into two pyruvate molecules, generating four ATP
molecules—for a net yield of two ATP—and two energy-containing NADH coenzymes. The NADH that is produced in
this process will be used later to produce ATP in the mitochondria. Importantly, by the end of this process, one
glucose molecule generates two pyruvate molecules, two high-energy ATP molecules, and two electron-carrying
NADH molecules.
The following discussions of glycolysis include the enzymes responsible for the reactions. When glucose enters a
cell, the enzyme hexokinase (or glucokinase, in the liver) rapidly adds a phosphate to convert it into
glucose-6-phosphate. A kinase is a type of enzyme that adds a phosphate molecule to a substrate (in this case,
glucose, but it can be true of other molecules also). This conversion step requires one ATP and essentially traps the
glucose in the cell, preventing it from passing back through the plasma membrane, thus allowing glycolysis to
proceed. It also functions to maintain a concentration gradient with higher glucose levels in the blood than in the
tissues. By establishing this concentration gradient, the glucose in the blood will be able to flow from an area of high
concentration (the blood) into an area of low concentration (the tissues) to be either used or stored. Hexokinase is
found in nearly every tissue in the body. Glucokinase, on the other hand, is expressed in tissues that are active
when blood glucose levels are high, such as the liver. Hexokinase has a higher affinity for glucose than glucokinase
and therefore is able to convert glucose at a faster rate than glucokinase. This is important when levels of glucose
are very low in the body, as it allows glucose to travel preferentially to those tissues that require it more.
In the next step of the first phase of glycolysis, the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate isomerase converts
glucose-6-phosphate into fructose-6-phosphate. Like glucose, fructose is also a six carbon-containing sugar. The
enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 then adds one more phosphate to convert fructose-6-phosphate into
fructose-1-6-bisphosphate, another six-carbon sugar, using another ATP molecule. Aldolase then breaks down this
fructose-1-6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon molecules, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. The triosephosphate isomerase enzyme then converts dihydroxyacetone phosphate into a second
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecule. Therefore, by the end of this chemical-priming or energy-consuming phase,
one glucose molecule is broken down into two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules.
The second phase of glycolysis, the energy-yielding phase, creates the energy that is the product of glycolysis.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase converts each three-carbon glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate produced
during the energy-consuming phase into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This reaction releases an electron that is then
picked up by NAD+ to create an NADH molecule. NADH is a high-energy molecule, like ATP, but unlike ATP, it is not
used as energy currency by the cell. Because there are two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecules, two NADH
molecules are synthesized during this step. Each 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is subsequently dephosphorylated (i.e., a
phosphate is removed) by phosphoglycerate kinase into 3-phosphoglycerate. Each phosphate released in this
reaction can convert one molecule of ADP into one high-energy ATP molecule, resulting in a gain of two ATP
molecules.
The enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase then converts the 3-phosphoglycerate molecules into 2-phosphoglycerate.
The enolase enzyme then acts upon the 2-phosphoglycerate molecules to convert them into phosphoenolpyruvate
molecules. The last step of glycolysis involves the dephosphorylation of the two phosphoenolpyruvate molecules by
pyruvate kinase to create two pyruvate molecules and two ATP molecules.
In summary, one glucose molecule breaks down into two pyruvate molecules, and creates two net ATP molecules
and two NADH molecules by glycolysis. Therefore, glycolysis generates energy for the cell and creates pyruvate
molecules that can be processed further through the aerobic Krebs cycle (also called the citric acid cycle or
tricarboxylic acid cycle); converted into lactic acid or alcohol (in yeast) by fermentation; or used later for the
synthesis of glucose through gluconeogenesis.

Anaerobic Respiration
When oxygen is limited or absent, pyruvate enters an anaerobic pathway called fermentation. In these reactions,
pyruvate can be converted into lactic acid. In addition to generating an additional ATP, this pathway serves to keep
the pyruvate concentration low so glycolysis continues, and it oxidizes NADH into the NAD+ needed by glycolysis. In
this reaction, lactic acid replaces oxygen as the final electron acceptor. Anaerobic respiration occurs in most cells of
the body when oxygen is limited or mitochondria are absent or nonfunctional. For example, because erythrocytes
(red blood cells) lack mitochondria, they must produce their ATP from anaerobic respiration. This is an effective
pathway of ATP production for short periods of time, ranging from seconds to a few minutes. The lactic acid
produced diffuses into the plasma and is carried to the liver, where it is converted back into pyruvate or glucose via
the Cori cycle. Similarly, when a person exercises, muscles use ATP faster than oxygen can be delivered to them.
They depend on glycolysis and lactic acid production for rapid ATP production.

Aerobic Respiration
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate can enter the Krebs cycle where additional energy is extracted as electrons are
transferred from the pyruvate to the receptors NAD+, GDP, and FAD, with carbon dioxide being a “waste product”
(Figure 24.6). The NADH and FADH2 pass electrons on to the electron transport chain, which uses the transferred
energy to produce ATP. As the terminal step in the electron transport chain, oxygen is the terminal electron
acceptor and creates water inside the mitochondria.

FIGURE 24.6
Aerobic versus Anaerobic Respiration
The process of anaerobic respiration converts glucose into two lactate molecules
in the absence of oxygen or within erythrocytes that lack mitochondria. During aerobic respiration, glucose is oxidized into two pyruvate
molecules.

Krebs Cycle/Citric Acid Cycle/Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle
The pyruvate molecules generated during glycolysis are transported across the mitochondrial membrane into the
inner mitochondrial matrix, where they are metabolized by enzymes in a pathway called the Krebs cycle (Figure
24.7). The Krebs cycle is also commonly called the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. During the
Krebs cycle, high-energy molecules, including ATP, NADH, and FADH2, are created. NADH and FADH2 then pass
electrons through the electron transport chain in the mitochondria to generate more ATP molecules.

FIGURE 24.7
Krebs Cycle
During the Krebs cycle, each pyruvate that is generated by glycolysis is converted into a two-carbon acetyl
CoA molecule. The acetyl CoA is systematically processed through the cycle and produces high-energy NADH, FADH2, and ATP molecules.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this animation (http://openstax.org/l/krebscycle) to observe the Krebs cycle.
The three-carbon pyruvate molecule generated during glycolysis moves from the cytoplasm into the mitochondrial
matrix, where it is converted by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase into a two-carbon acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl
CoA) molecule. This reaction is an oxidative decarboxylation reaction. It converts the three-carbon pyruvate into a
two-carbon acetyl CoA molecule, releasing carbon dioxide and transferring two electrons that combine with NAD+ to
form NADH. Acetyl CoA enters the Krebs cycle by combining with a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form the
six-carbon molecule citrate, or citric acid, at the same time releasing the coenzyme A molecule.
The six-carbon citrate molecule is systematically converted to a five-carbon molecule and then a four-carbon
molecule, ending with oxaloacetate, the beginning of the cycle. Along the way, each citrate molecule will produce
one ATP, one FADH2, and three NADH. The FADH2 and NADH will enter the oxidative phosphorylation system
located in the inner mitochondrial membrane. In addition, the Krebs cycle supplies the starting materials to process
and break down proteins and fats.
To start the Krebs cycle, citrate synthase combines acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate to form a six-carbon citrate
molecule; CoA is subsequently released and can combine with another pyruvate molecule to begin the cycle again.
The aconitase enzyme converts citrate into isocitrate. In two successive steps of oxidative decarboxylation, two
molecules of CO2 and two NADH molecules are produced when isocitrate dehydrogenase converts isocitrate into
the five-carbon α-ketoglutarate, which is then catalyzed and converted into the four-carbon succinyl CoA by α-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. The enzyme succinyl CoA dehydrogenase then converts succinyl CoA into succinate
and forms the high-energy molecule GTP, which transfers its energy to ADP to produce ATP. Succinate
dehydrogenase then converts succinate into fumarate, forming a molecule of FADH2. Fumarase then converts
fumarate into malate, which malate dehydrogenase then converts back into oxaloacetate while reducing NAD+ to
NADH. Oxaloacetate is then ready to combine with the next acetyl CoA to start the Krebs cycle again (see Figure
24.7). For each turn of the cycle, three NADH, one ATP (through GTP), and one FADH2 are created. Each carbon of
pyruvate is converted into CO2, which is released as a byproduct of oxidative (aerobic) respiration.

Oxidative Phosphorylation and the Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain (ETC) uses the NADH and FADH2 produced by the Krebs cycle to generate ATP.
Electrons from NADH and FADH2 are transferred through protein complexes embedded in the inner mitochondrial
membrane by a series of enzymatic reactions. The electron transport chain consists of a series of four enzyme
complexes (Complex I – Complex IV) and two coenzymes (ubiquinone and Cytochrome c), which act as electron
carriers and proton pumps used to transfer H+ ions into the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial
membranes (Figure 24.8). The ETC couples the transfer of electrons between a donor (like NADH) and an electron
acceptor (like O2) with the transfer of protons (H+ ions) across the inner mitochondrial membrane, enabling the
process of oxidative phosphorylation. In the presence of oxygen, energy is passed, stepwise, through the electron
carriers to collect gradually the energy needed to attach a phosphate to ADP and produce ATP. The role of molecular
oxygen, O2, is as the terminal electron acceptor for the ETC. This means that once the electrons have passed
through the entire ETC, they must be passed to another, separate molecule. These electrons, O2, and H+ ions from
the matrix combine to form new water molecules. This is the basis for your need to breathe in oxygen. Without
oxygen, electron flow through the ETC ceases.

FIGURE 24.8
Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain is a series of electron carriers and ion pumps that are used to
pump H+ ions out of the inner mitochondrial matrix.

INTERACTIVE LINK
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/ETchain) to learn about the electron transport chain.
The electrons released from NADH and FADH2 are passed along the chain by each of the carriers, which are reduced
when they receive the electron and oxidized when passing it on to the next carrier. Each of these reactions releases
a small amount of energy, which is used to pump H+ ions across the inner membrane. The accumulation of these
protons in the space between the membranes creates a proton gradient with respect to the mitochondrial matrix.
Also embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane is an amazing protein pore complex called ATP synthase.
Effectively, it is a turbine that is powered by the flow of H+ ions across the inner membrane down a gradient and into
the mitochondrial matrix. As the H+ ions traverse the complex, the shaft of the complex rotates. This rotation
enables other portions of ATP synthase to encourage ADP and Pi to create ATP. In accounting for the total number of
ATP produced per glucose molecule through aerobic respiration, it is important to remember the following points:
•
A net of two ATP are produced through glycolysis (four produced and two consumed during the energy-
consuming stage). However, these two ATP are used for transporting the NADH produced during glycolysis from
the cytoplasm into the mitochondria. Therefore, the net production of ATP during glycolysis is zero.
•
In all phases after glycolysis, the number of ATP, NADH, and FADH2 produced must be multiplied by two to
reflect how each glucose molecule produces two pyruvate molecules.
•
In the ETC, about three ATP are produced for every oxidized NADH. However, only about two ATP are produced
for every oxidized FADH2. The electrons from FADH2 produce less ATP, because they start at a lower point in the
ETC (Complex II) compared to the electrons from NADH (Complex I) (see Figure 24.8).
Therefore, for every glucose molecule that enters aerobic respiration, a net total of 36 ATPs are produced (Figure
24.9).

FIGURE 24.9
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism involves glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and the electron transport
chain.

Gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of new glucose molecules from pyruvate, lactate, glycerol, or the amino acids
alanine or glutamine. This process takes place primarily in the liver during periods of low glucose, that is, under
conditions of fasting, starvation, and low carbohydrate diets. So, the question can be raised as to why the body
would create something it has just spent a fair amount of effort to break down? Certain key organs, including the
brain, can use only glucose as an energy source; therefore, it is essential that the body maintain a minimum blood
glucose concentration. When the blood glucose concentration falls below that certain point, new glucose is
synthesized by the liver to raise the blood concentration to normal.

Gluconeogenesis is not simply the reverse of glycolysis. There are some important differences (Figure 24.10).
Pyruvate is a common starting material for gluconeogenesis. First, the pyruvate is converted into oxaloacetate.
Oxaloacetate then serves as a substrate for the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), which
transforms oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). From this step, gluconeogenesis is nearly the reverse of
glycolysis. PEP is converted back into 2-phosphoglycerate, which is converted into 3-phosphoglycerate. Then,
3-phosphoglycerate is converted into 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate and then into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Two
molecules of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate then combine to form fructose-1-6-bisphosphate, which is converted
into fructose 6-phosphate and then into glucose-6-phosphate. Finally, a series of reactions generates glucose itself.
In gluconeogenesis (as compared to glycolysis), the enzyme hexokinase is replaced by glucose-6-phosphatase, and
the enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 is replaced by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. This helps the cell to regulate
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis independently of each other.
As will be discussed as part of lipolysis, fats can be broken down into glycerol, which can be phosphorylated to form
dihydroxyacetone phosphate or DHAP. DHAP can either enter the glycolytic pathway or be used by the liver as a
substrate for gluconeogenesis.

FIGURE 24.10
Gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from pyruvate, lactate, glycerol, alanine, or glutamate.

Aging and the...
Body’s Metabolic Rate
The human body’s metabolic rate decreases nearly 2 percent per decade after age 30. Changes in body
composition, including reduced lean muscle mass, are mostly responsible for this decrease. The most dramatic
loss of muscle mass, and consequential decline in metabolic rate, occurs between 50 and 70 years of age. Loss
of muscle mass is the equivalent of reduced strength, which tends to inhibit seniors from engaging in sufficient
physical activity. This results in a positive-feedback system where the reduced physical activity leads to even
more muscle loss, further reducing metabolism.
There are several things that can be done to help prevent general declines in metabolism and to fight back
against the cyclic nature of these declines. These include eating breakfast, eating small meals frequently,
consuming plenty of lean protein, drinking water to remain hydrated, exercising (including strength training), and
getting enough sleep. These measures can help keep energy levels from dropping and curb the urge for
increased calorie consumption from excessive snacking. While these strategies are not guaranteed to maintain
metabolism, they do help prevent muscle loss and may increase energy levels. Some experts also suggest
avoiding sugar, which can lead to excess fat storage. Spicy foods and green tea might also be beneficial. Because
stress activates cortisol release, and cortisol slows metabolism, avoiding stress, or at least practicing relaxation
techniques, can also help.
