INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 5
The Integumentary System
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying the chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the integumentary system and the role it plays in homeostasis
•
Describe the layers of the skin and the functions of each layer
•
Describe the accessory structures of the skin and the functions of each
•
Describe the changes that occur in the integumentary system during the aging process
•
Discuss several common diseases, disorders, and injuries that affect the integumentary system
•
Explain treatments for some common diseases, disorders, and injuries of the integumentary system
What do you think when you look at your skin in the mirror? Do you think about covering it with
makeup, adding a tattoo, or maybe a body piercing? Or do you think about the fact that the skin belongs to one of
the body’s most essential and dynamic systems: the integumentary system? The integumentary system refers to the
skin and its accessory structures, and it is responsible for much more than simply lending to your outward
appearance. In the adult human body, the skin makes up about 16 percent of body weight and covers an area of 1.5
to 2 m2. In fact, the skin and accessory structures are the largest organ system in the human body. As such, the skin
protects your inner organs and it is in need of daily care and protection to maintain its health. This chapter will
introduce the structure and functions of the integumentary system, as well as some of the diseases, disorders, and
injuries that can affect this system.
5.1 Layers of the Skin
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the components of the integumentary system
•
Describe the layers of the skin and the functions of each layer
•
Identify and describe the hypodermis and deep fascia
•
Describe the role of keratinocytes and their life cycle
•
Describe the role of melanocytes in skin pigmentation
Although you may not typically think of the skin as an organ, it is in fact made of tissues that work together as a
single structure to perform unique and critical functions. The skin and its accessory structures make up the
integumentary system, which provides the body with overall protection. The skin is made of multiple layers of cells
and tissues, which are held to underlying structures by connective tissue (Figure 5.2). The deeper layer of skin is
well vascularized (has numerous blood vessels). It also has numerous sensory, and autonomic and sympathetic
Figure 5.1
Your skin is a vital part of your life and appearance (a–b). Some people choose to embellish it with tattoos (a) or makeup (b).
(credit a: Steve Teo; credit b: “spaceodissey”/flickr)
nerve fibers ensuring communication to and from the brain.
FIGURE 5.2
Layers of Skin
The skin is composed of two main layers: the epidermis, made of closely packed epithelial cells, and the
dermis, made of dense, irregular connective tissue that houses blood vessels, hair follicles, sweat glands, and other structures. Beneath the
dermis lies the hypodermis, which is composed mainly of loose connective and fatty tissues.
INTERACTIVE LINK
The skin consists of two main layers and a closely associated layer. View this animation (http://openstax.org/l/
layers) to learn more about layers of the skin. What are the basic functions of each of these layers?
The Epidermis
The epidermis is composed of keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. It is made of four or five layers of
epithelial cells, depending on its location in the body. It does not have any blood vessels within it (i.e., it is
avascular). Skin that has four layers of cells is referred to as “thin skin.” From deep to superficial, these layers are
the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, and stratum corneum. Most of the skin can be
classified as thin skin. “Thick skin” is found only on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet. It has a fifth
layer, called the stratum lucidum, located between the stratum corneum and the stratum granulosum (Figure 5.3).
FIGURE 5.3
Thin Skin versus Thick Skin
These slides show cross-sections of the epidermis and dermis of (a) thin and (b) thick skin.
Note the significant difference in the thickness of the epithelial layer of the thick skin. From top, LM × 40, LM × 40. (Micrographs provided by
the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The cells in all of the layers except the stratum basale are called keratinocytes. A keratinocyte is a cell that
manufactures and stores the protein keratin. Keratin is an intracellular fibrous protein that gives hair, nails, and skin
their hardness and water-resistant properties. The keratinocytes in the stratum corneum are dead and regularly
slough away, being replaced by cells from the deeper layers (Figure 5.4).

FIGURE 5.4
Epidermis
The epidermis is epithelium composed of multiple layers of cells. The basal layer consists of cuboidal cells,
whereas the outer layers are squamous, keratinized cells, so the whole epithelium is often described as being keratinized stratified
squamous epithelium. LM × 40. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/Epidermis) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin, what do you notice about the cells?
Stratum Basale
The stratum basale (also called the stratum germinativum) is the deepest epidermal layer and attaches the
epidermis to the basal lamina, below which lie the layers of the dermis. The cells in the stratum basale bond to the
dermis via intertwining collagen fibers, referred to as the basement membrane. A finger-like projection, or fold,
known as the dermal papilla (plural = dermal papillae) is found in the superficial portion of the dermis. Dermal
papillae increase the strength of the connection between the epidermis and dermis; the greater the folding, the
stronger the connections made (Figure 5.5).
FIGURE 5.5
Layers of the Epidermis
The epidermis of thick skin has five layers: stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum
granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum.
The stratum basale is a single layer of cells primarily made of basal cells. A basal cell is a cuboidal-shaped stem cell
that is a precursor of the keratinocytes of the epidermis. All of the keratinocytes are produced from this single layer
of cells, which are constantly going through mitosis to produce new cells. As new cells are formed, the existing cells
are pushed superficially away from the stratum basale. Two other cell types are found dispersed among the basal
cells in the stratum basale. The first is a Merkel cell, which functions as a receptor and is responsible for stimulating
sensory nerves that the brain perceives as touch. These cells are especially abundant on the surfaces of the hands
and feet. The second is a melanocyte, a cell that produces the pigment melanin. Melanin gives hair and skin its
color, and also helps protect the living cells of the epidermis from ultraviolet (UV) radiation damage.
In a growing fetus, fingerprints form where the cells of the stratum basale meet the papillae of the underlying
dermal layer (papillary layer), resulting in the formation of the ridges on your fingers that you recognize as
fingerprints. Fingerprints are unique to each individual and are used for forensic analyses because the patterns do
not change with the growth and aging processes.
Stratum Spinosum
As the name suggests, the stratum spinosum is spiny in appearance due to the protruding cell processes that join
the cells via a structure called a desmosome. The desmosomes interlock with each other and strengthen the bond
between the cells. It is interesting to note that the “spiny” nature of this layer is an artifact of the staining process.
Unstained epidermis samples do not exhibit this characteristic appearance. The stratum spinosum is composed of
eight to 10 layers of keratinocytes, formed as a result of cell division in the stratum basale (Figure 5.6). Interspersed
among the keratinocytes of this layer is a type of dendritic cell called the Langerhans cell, which functions as a
macrophage by engulfing bacteria, foreign particles, and damaged cells that occur in this layer.
FIGURE 5.6
Cells of the Epidermis
The cells in the different layers of the epidermis originate from basal cells located in the stratum
basale, yet the cells of each layer are distinctively different. EM × 2700. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
INTERACTIVE LINK
View the University of Michigan WebScope (http://openstax.org/l/basal) to explore the tissue sample in greater
detail. If you zoom on the cells at the outermost layer of this section of skin, what do you notice about the cells?
The keratinocytes in the stratum spinosum begin the synthesis of keratin and release a water-repelling glycolipid
that helps prevent water loss from the body, making the skin relatively waterproof. As new keratinocytes are
produced atop the stratum basale, the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum are pushed into the stratum
granulosum.
Stratum Granulosum
The stratum granulosum has a grainy appearance due to further changes to the keratinocytes as they are pushed
from the stratum spinosum. The cells (three to five layers deep) become flatter, their cell membranes thicken, and
they generate large amounts of the proteins keratin, which is fibrous, and keratohyalin, which accumulates as
lamellar granules within the cells (see Figure 5.5). These two proteins make up the bulk of the keratinocyte mass in
the stratum granulosum and give the layer its grainy appearance. The nuclei and other cell organelles disintegrate as
the cells die, leaving behind the keratin, keratohyalin, and cell membranes that will form the stratum lucidum, the
stratum corneum, and the accessory structures of hair and nails.
Stratum Lucidum
The stratum lucidum is a smooth, seemingly translucent layer of the epidermis located just above the stratum
granulosum and below the stratum corneum. This thin layer of cells is found only in the thick skin of the palms,
soles, and digits. The keratinocytes that compose the stratum lucidum are dead and flattened (see Figure 5.5).
These cells are densely packed with eleidin, a clear protein, derived from keratohyalin, which gives these cells their
transparent (i.e., lucid) appearance.
Stratum Corneum
The stratum corneum is the most superficial layer of the epidermis and is the layer exposed to the outside
environment (see Figure 5.5). The increased keratinization (also called cornification) of the cells in this layer gives it
its name. There are usually 15 to 30 layers of cells in the stratum corneum. This dry, dead layer helps prevent the
penetration of microbes and the dehydration of underlying tissues, and provides a mechanical protection against
abrasion for the more delicate, underlying layers. Cells in this layer are shed periodically and are replaced by cells
pushed up from the stratum granulosum (or stratum lucidum in the case of the palms and soles of feet). The entire
layer is replaced during a period of about 4 weeks. Cosmetic procedures, such as microdermabrasion, help remove
some of the dry, upper layer and aim to keep the skin looking “fresh” and healthy.
Dermis
The dermis might be considered the “core” of the integumentary system (derma- = “skin”), as distinct from the
epidermis (epi- = “upon” or “over”) and hypodermis (hypo- = “below”). It contains blood and lymph vessels, nerves,
and other structures, such as hair follicles and sweat glands. The dermis is made of two layers of connective tissue
that compose an interconnected mesh of elastin and collagenous fibers, produced by fibroblasts (Figure 5.7).

FIGURE 5.7
Layers of the Dermis
This stained slide shows the two components of the dermis—the papillary layer and the reticular
layer. Both are made of connective tissue with fibers of collagen extending from one to the other, making the border between the two
somewhat indistinct. The dermal papillae extending into the epidermis belong to the papillary layer, whereas the dense collagen fiber
bundles below belong to the reticular layer. LM × 10. (credit: modification of work by “kilbad”/Wikimedia Commons)
Papillary Layer
The papillary layer is made of loose, areolar connective tissue, which means the collagen and elastin fibers of this
layer form a loose mesh. This superficial layer of the dermis projects into the stratum basale of the epidermis to
form finger-like dermal papillae (see Figure 5.7). Within the papillary layer are fibroblasts, a small number of fat
cells (adipocytes), and an abundance of small blood vessels. In addition, the papillary layer contains phagocytes,
defensive cells that help fight bacteria or other infections that have breached the skin. This layer also contains
lymphatic capillaries, nerve fibers, and touch receptors called the Meissner corpuscles.
Reticular Layer
Underlying the papillary layer is the much thicker reticular layer, composed of dense, irregular connective tissue.
This layer is well vascularized and has a rich sensory and sympathetic nerve supply. The reticular layer appears
reticulated (net-like) due to a tight meshwork of fibers. Elastin fibers provide some elasticity to the skin, enabling
movement. Collagen fibers provide structure and tensile strength, with strands of collagen extending into both the
papillary layer and the hypodermis. In addition, collagen binds water to keep the skin hydrated. Collagen injections
and Retin-A creams help restore skin turgor by either introducing collagen externally or stimulating blood flow and
repair of the dermis, respectively.
Hypodermis
The hypodermis (also called the subcutaneous layer or superficial fascia) is a layer directly below the dermis and
serves to connect the skin to the underlying fascia (fibrous tissue) of the bones and muscles. It is not strictly a part
of the skin, although the border between the hypodermis and dermis can be difficult to distinguish. The hypodermis
consists of well-vascularized, loose, areolar connective tissue and adipose tissue, which functions as a mode of fat
storage and provides insulation and cushioning for the integument.

Pigmentation
The color of skin is influenced by a number of pigments, including melanin, carotene, and hemoglobin. Recall that
melanin is produced by cells called melanocytes, which are found scattered throughout the stratum basale of the
epidermis. The melanin is transferred into the keratinocytes via a cellular vesicle called a melanosome (Figure 5.8).
Everyday Connection
Lipid Storage
The hypodermis is home to most of the fat that concerns people when they are trying to keep their weight under
control. Adipose tissue present in the hypodermis consists of fat-storing cells called adipocytes. This stored fat
can serve as an energy reserve, insulate the body to prevent heat loss, and act as a cushion to protect underlying
structures from trauma.
Where the fat is deposited and accumulates within the hypodermis depends on hormones (testosterone,
estrogen, insulin, glucagon, leptin, and others), as well as genetic factors. Fat distribution changes as our bodies
mature and age. Males tend to accumulate fat in different areas (neck, arms, lower back, and abdomen) than do
females (breasts, hips, thighs, and buttocks). The body mass index (BMI) is often used as a measure of fat,
although this measure is, in fact, derived from a mathematical formula that compares body weight (mass) to
height. Therefore, its accuracy as a health indicator can be called into question in individuals who are extremely
physically fit.
In many animals, there is a pattern of storing excess calories as fat to be used in times when food is not readily
available. In much of the developed world, insufficient exercise coupled with the ready availability and
consumption of high-calorie foods have resulted in unwanted accumulations of adipose tissue in many people.
Although periodic accumulation of excess fat may have provided an evolutionary advantage to our ancestors,
who experienced unpredictable bouts of famine, it is now becoming chronic and considered a major health
threat. Recent studies indicate that a distressing percentage of our population is overweight and/or clinically
obese. Not only is this a problem for the individuals affected, but it also has a severe impact on our healthcare
system. Changes in lifestyle, specifically in diet and exercise, are the best ways to control body fat accumulation,
especially when it reaches levels that increase the risk of heart disease and diabetes.

FIGURE 5.8
Skin Pigmentation
The relative coloration of the skin depends of the amount of melanin produced by melanocytes in the
stratum basale and taken up by keratinocytes.
Melanin occurs in two primary forms. Eumelanin exists as black and brown, whereas pheomelanin provides a red
color. Dark-skinned individuals produce more melanin than those with pale skin. Exposure to the UV rays of the sun
or a tanning salon causes melanin to be manufactured and built up in keratinocytes, as sun exposure stimulates
keratinocytes to secrete chemicals that stimulate melanocytes. The accumulation of melanin in keratinocytes
results in the darkening of the skin, or a tan. This increased melanin accumulation protects the DNA of epidermal
cells from UV ray damage and the breakdown of folic acid, a nutrient necessary for our health and well-being. In
contrast, too much melanin can interfere with the production of vitamin D, an important nutrient involved in calcium
absorption. Thus, the amount of melanin present in our skin is dependent on a balance between available sunlight
and folic acid destruction, and protection from UV radiation and vitamin D production.
It requires about 10 days after initial sun exposure for melanin synthesis to peak, which is why pale-skinned
individuals tend to suffer sunburns of the epidermis initially. Dark-skinned individuals can also get sunburns, but are
more protected than are pale-skinned individuals. Melanosomes are temporary structures that are eventually
destroyed by fusion with lysosomes; this fact, along with melanin-filled keratinocytes in the stratum corneum
sloughing off, makes tanning impermanent.
Too much sun exposure can eventually lead to wrinkling due to the destruction of the cellular structure of the skin,
and in severe cases, can cause sufficient DNA damage to result in skin cancer. When there is an irregular
accumulation of melanocytes in the skin, freckles appear. Moles are larger masses of melanocytes, and although
most are benign, they should be monitored for changes that might indicate the presence of cancer (Figure 5.9).

FIGURE 5.9
Moles
Moles range from benign accumulations of melanocytes to melanomas. These structures populate the landscape of
our skin. (credit: the National Cancer Institute)
Disorders of the...
Integumentary System
The first thing a clinician sees is the skin, and so the examination of the skin should be part of any thorough
physical examination. Most skin disorders are relatively benign, but a few, including melanomas, can be fatal if
untreated. A couple of the more noticeable disorders, albinism and vitiligo, affect the appearance of the skin and
its accessory organs. Although neither is fatal, it would be hard to claim that they are benign, at least to the
individuals so afflicted.
Albinism is a genetic disorder that affects (completely or partially) the coloring of skin, hair, and eyes. The
defect is primarily due to the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin. Individuals with albinism tend to
appear white or very pale due to the lack of melanin in their skin and hair. Recall that melanin helps protect the
skin from the harmful effects of UV radiation. Individuals with albinism tend to need more protection from UV
radiation, as they are more prone to sunburns and skin cancer. They also tend to be more sensitive to light and
have vision problems due to the lack of pigmentation on the retinal wall. Treatment of this disorder usually
involves addressing the symptoms, such as limiting UV light exposure to the skin and eyes. In vitiligo, the
melanocytes in certain areas lose their ability to produce melanin, possibly due to an autoimmune reaction. This
leads to a loss of color in patches (Figure 5.10). Neither albinism nor vitiligo directly affects the lifespan of an
individual.

INTERACTIVE LINK
This ABC video follows the story of a pair of fraternal African-American twins, one of whom is albino. Watch this
video (http://openstax.org/l/albino) to learn about the challenges these children and their family face. Which
ethnicities do you think are exempt from the possibility of albinism?